# rawhide - find files using pretty C expressions
# https://raf.org/rawhide
# https://github.com/raforg/rawhide
# https://codeberg.org/raforg/rawhide
#
# Copyright (C) 1990 Ken Stauffer, 2022-2023 raf <raf@raf.org>
#
# This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
# it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
# the Free Software Foundation; either version 3 of the License, or
# (at your option) any later version.
#
# This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
# but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
# MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
# GNU General Public License for more details.
#
# You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
# along with this program; if not, see <https://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
#
# 20231013 raf <raf@raf.org>

=head1 NAME

C</etc/rawhide.conf> - configuration file for I<rh(1)>

=head1 DESCRIPTION

The C</etc/rawhide.conf> file (or similar) contains a standard library of
functions that can be used by all users of I<rh(1)>. It is the first file
read by I<rh(1)>. Any files in the C</etc/rawhide.conf.d> directory (or
similar) whose names do not start with dot (C<".">) are then read (in
lexicographic order), and can contain additional system-wide function
definitions.

User-specific configuration is then read from the C<~/.rhrc> and
C<~/.rhrc.d/*> files in the same manner.

Any files specified by I<rh(1)>'s C<-f> option are then read, followed by
the contents of I<rh(1)>'s C<-e> option argument, which can also contain
additional function definitions, and a trailing file test expression.

All of these share the same syntax.

The location of the system-wide configuration might be somewhere else,
depending on the operating system preferences (e.g., C</usr/local/etc>,
C</opt/local/etc>, C</usr/pkg/etc>).

The output of S<C<rh --help>> states where the system-wide configuration
files are on the local system.

=head1 FILE FORMAT

The following subsections describe the syntax and semantics of I<rawhide>
search criteria source/configuration files.

=head2 File structure

Every I<rawhide> source/configuration file consists of zero or more function
definitions, optionally followed by a file test expression, which is
optionally terminated by a semicolon (C<";">).

If a source file does contain a trailing file test expression, that
expression becomes the default file test expression, unless another file
read later also contains a trailing file test expression, in which case,
that expression becomes the default file test expression. It is not expected
that any system-wide or user-specific configuration files will contain a
trailing file test expression, but they can.

Files specified with the C<-f> option are more likely to contain a trailing
file test expression, in which case, there is no need for the C<-e> option
(explicit or implicit). But if the C<-e> option is also supplied, then any
file test expression that it specifies takes precedence.

Technically, even the C<-e> option argument does not require a file test
expression (because there is a default which matches everything), but it
will usually supply one.

=head2 Comments

Search criteria can include explanations in the form of comments. There are
three comment styles:

=over 4

=item S<C</* C-style comments */>>

These comments start with C</*> and end with C<*/> and can span multiple
lines.

=item S<C<// C++-style comments>>

These comments start with C<//> and end at the end of the line.

=item S<C<# Shell-style comments>>

These comments start with C<#> and end at the end of the line.

=back

=head2 Grammar

The I<rawhide> search criteria language is like a tiny subset of the I<C>
language's expression syntax, with a few domain-specific additions. All of
I<C>'s conditional, logical, relational, equality, arithmetic, and bitwise
operators are available. But the only type is integer. There are special
tokens to represent various things, some built-in symbols, and user-defined
functions.

Here is the grammar of the search criteria language (BNF with a few
liberties taken):

  <program> ::=
        <function-list> <expression> ";" EOF
      | <function-list> <expression> EOF
      | <function-list> EOF

  <function-list> ::=
        <function> <function-list>
      | EMPTY

  <function> ::=
      IDENTIFIER <parameters> "{" <return> <expression> <eos> "}"

  <return> ::=
        "return"
      | EMPTY

  <eos> == >
        ";"
      | EMPTY

  <parameters> ::=
        "(" <id-list> ")"
      | "(" ")"
      | EMPTY

  <id-list> ::=
      IDENTIFIER <id-tail>

  <id-tail> ::=
        "," <id-list>
      | EMPTY

  <expression> ::= <cond> "," <expression> | <cond>

  <cond> ::= <or> "?" <cond> ":" <cond> | <or>

  <or> ::= <and> "||" <or> | <and>

  <and> ::= <bitor> "&&" <and> | <bitor>

  <bitor> ::= <bitxor> "|" <bitor> | <bitxor>

  <bitxor> ::= <bitand> "^" <bitxor> | <bitand>

  <bitand> ::= <eq> "&" <bitand> | <eq>

  <eq> ::= <rel> <eq-op> <rel> | <rel>
  <eq-op> ::= "==" | "!="

  <rel> ::= <shift> <rel-op> <shift> | <shift>
  <rel-op> ::= "<" | ">" | "<=" | ">="

  <shift> ::= <add> <shift-op> <shift> | <add>
  <shift-op> ::= "<<" | ">>"

  <add> ::= <mul> <add-op> <add> | <mul>
  <add-op> ::= "+" | "-"

  <mul> ::= <unary> <mul-op> <mul> | <unary>
  <mul-op> ::= "*" | "/" | "%"

  <unary> ::= <unary-op> <unary> | <factor>
  <unary-op> ::= "-" | "~" | "!"

  <factor> ::=
        <number>
      | <user-id>
      | <group-id>
      | "[" <date-time> "]"
      | <pattern>
      | <reference-file>
      | <built-in>
      | <function-call>
      | <parameter>
      | "(" <expression> ")"

  <number> ::=
        DECIMAL
      | DECIMAL NOSPACE <scale>
      | "0" NOSPACE OCTAL
      | "0x" NOSPACE HEXADECIMAL

  <scale> ::=
        "K" | "M" | "G" | "T" | "P" | "E"
      | "k" | "m" | "g" | "t" | "p" | "e"

  <user-id> ::=
        "$" NOSPACE USERNAME
      | "$$"

  <group-id> ::=
        "@" NOSPACE GROUPNAME
      | "@@"

  <date-time> ::=
        <date>
      | <date> <time>

  <date> ::=
        DECIMAL "/" DECIMAL "/" DECIMAL

  <time> ::=
        DECIMAL
      | DECIMAL ":" DECIMAL
      | DECIMAL ":" DECIMAL ":" DECIMAL
      | DECIMAL ":" DECIMAL ":" DECIMAL "." DECIMAL

  <pattern> ::=
        STRING
      | STRING NOSPACE "." NOSPACE <pattern-modifier>

  <pattern-modifier> ::=
                 "i"     | "re"     | "rei"
      | "path" | "ipath" | "repath" | "reipath"
      | "link" | "ilink  | "relink" | "reilink"
      | "body" | "ibody  | "rebody" | "reibody"
      | "what" | "iwhat  | "rewhat" | "reiwhat"
      | "mime" | "imime  | "remime" | "reimime"
      | "acl"  | "iacl"  | "reacl"  | "reiacl"
      | "dacl" | "idacl" | "redacl" | "rediacl"
      | "ea"   | "iea"   | "reea"   | "reiea"
      | "sh"   | "ush"

  <reference-file> ::=
      STRING NOSPACE "." NOSPACE <reference-file-field>

  <reference-file-field> ::=
        "exists"   | "dev"      | "major"      | "minor"   | "ino"
      | "mode"     | "type"     | "perm"       | "nlink"   | "uid"
      | "gid"      | "rdev"     | "rmajor"     | "rminor"  | "size"
      | "blksize"  | "blocks"   | "atime"      | "mtime"   | "ctime"
      | "btime"    | "attr"     | "proj"       | "gen"     | "strlen"
      | "inode"    | "nlinks"   | "user"       | "group"   | "sz"
      | "accessed" | "modified" | "changed"    | ""created | "birth"
      | "attribute" | "project" | "generation" | "len"

  <built-in> ::=
        "dev"        | "major"   | "minor"    | "ino"      | "mode"
      | "nlink"      | "uid"     | "gid"      | "rdev"     | "rmajor"
      | "rminor"     | "size"    | "blksize"  | "blocks"   | "atime"
      | "mtime"      | "ctime"   | "btime"    | "attr"     | "proj"
      | "gen"        | "nouser"  | "nogroup"  | "readable" | "writable"
      | "executable" | "strlen"  | "depth"    | "prune"    | "trim"
      | "exit"       | "now"     | "today"    | "second"   | "minute"
      | "hour"       | "day"     | "week"     | "month"    | "year"
      | "IFREG"      | "IFDIR"   | "IFLNK"    | "IFCHR"    | "IFBLK"
      | "IFSOCK"     | "IFIFO"   | "IFDOOR"   | "IFWHT"    | "IFMT"
      | "ISUID"      | "ISGID"   | "ISVTX"    | "IRWXU"    | "IRUSR"
      | "IWUSR"      | "IXUSR"   | "IRWXG"    | "IRGRP"    | "IWGRP"
      | "IXGRP"      | "IRWXO"   | "IROTH"    | "IWOTH"    | "IXOTH"
      | "texists"    | "tdev"    | "tmajor"   | "tminor"   | "tino"
      | "tmode"      | "tnlink"  | "tuid"     | "tgid"     | "trdev"
      | "trmajor"    | "trminor" | "tsize"    | "tblksize" | "tblocks"
      | "tatime"     | "tmtime"  | "tctime"   | "tbtime"   | "tstrlen"

  <function-call> ::=
      IDENTIFIER <arguments>

  <arguments> ::=
        "(" <cond-list> ")"
      | "(" ")"
      | EMPTY

  <cond-list> ::=
      <cond> <cond-tail>

  <cond-tail> ::=
        "," <cond-list>
      | EMPTY

  <parameter> ::=
      IDENTIFIER

=head2 Operators

The following I<C> operators are available (presented in groups of
decreasing precedence):

  -   Minus (unary)
  ~   Bitwise not (unary)
  !   Logical not (unary)

  *   Multiplication
  /   Division
  %   Modulo (remainder)

  +   Addition
  -   Subtraction

  <<  Bit shift left
  >>  Bit shift right

  <   Less than
  >   Greater than
  <=  Less than or equal to
  >=  Greater than or equal to

  ==  Equals
  !=  Not equals

  &   Bitwise and

  ^   Bitwise exclusive or (xor)

  |   Bitwise or

  &&  Logical and

  ||  Logical or

  ?:  Conditional (i.e., condition-expr ? if-expr : else-expr)

  ,   Sequence

Parentheses override operator precedence (e.g., S<C<(1 + 2) * 3>>).

With the I<sequence> operator (C<,>), both operands are executed. The value
of the first operand is discarded. The result is the value of the second
operand.

Like in I<C>, the C<?:> and C<||> and C<&&> operators use "short-circuit"
evaluation.

With the ternary I<conditional> operator (C<?:>), the second operand is only
evaluated when the first operand evaluates to true (i.e., non-zero), and the
third operand is only evaluated when the first operand evaluates to false
(i.e., zero).

With the I<logical or> operator (C<||>), the second operand is only
evaluated when the first operand evaluates to false. Otherwise, it is not
necessary.

With the I<logical and> operator (C<&&>), the second operand is only
evaluated when the first operand evaluates to true. Otherwise, it is not
necessary.

This matters when using the C<prune>, C<trim>, or C<exit> built-ins (see
below), because they have control flow side-effects when they are
evaluated. It is also important when using the C<texists> built-in, the
C<sh> and C<ush> "pattern" modifiers, and the C<exists> reference file field
(see below).

All the other binary operators always evaluate both operands.

=head2 Numbers

Numeric constants can be decimal, octal (starting with C<0>), or hexadecimal
(starting with C<0x>). All numbers are integers. And everything is a number.

Decimal numbers can have a suffix letter that indicates the scale (e.g.,
C<10K>), in units based on 1024 (upper case), or based on 1000 (lower case):

  K = Kibibytes (KiB, units of 1024)
  M = Mebibytes (MiB, units of 1024^2)
  G = Gibibytes (GiB, units of 1024^3)
  T = Tebibytes (TiB, units of 1024^4)
  P = Pebibytes (PiB, units of 1024^5)
  E = Exbibytes (EiB, units of 1024^6)

  k = Kilobytes  (KB, units of 1000)
  m = Megabytes  (MB, units of 1000^2)
  g = Gigabytes  (GB, units of 1000^3)
  t = Terabytes  (TB, units of 1000^4)
  p = Petabytes  (PB, units of 1000^5)
  e = Exabytes   (EB, units of 1000^6)

=head2 Strings

String literals are enclosed in double quotes (C<""">). Any double quote
characters in the string must be quoted with a preceding backslash character
(C<"\">). Backslashes can also be quoted with a preceding backslash. Any
backslashes that do not precede a double quote or another backslash are
treated as normal characters, and are included in the string.

Strings usually contain a pattern to match against file names (or certain
other information associated with files). The value of a pattern string is
whether or not the pattern match succeeded. Strings can also contain a shell
command to execute. The value of a shell command string is the exit success
status of the command. See the B<Pattern matching> and B<Pattern modifiers>
sections below for details. Strings can also contain the path of a reference
file to use for comparison purposes. See the B<Reference file fields>
section below for details.

As an alternative syntax, string literals can instead be enclosed by curly
braces (C<"{"> and C<"}">). Matching pairs of curly braces can appear
unquoted in the string (even nested), but they can be quoted if necessary
with a preceding backslash character (C<"\">). Backslashes can also be
quoted with a preceding backslash. Any backslashes that do not precede a
curly brace or another backslash are treated as normal characters, and are
included in the string.

This alternative syntax is particularly useful for shell commands that
contain double quotes, because it makes it unnecessary to quote them with
backslashes. The need for backslash-quoting is reduced to unmatched curly
braces that would also need to be quoted in the shell command (i.e., not
meta-characters). But matching pairs of curly braces that are used as shell
meta-characters do not need to be backslash-quoted. And of course, any
backslashes that are needed in the shell command would still need to be
backslash-quoted. But both of these cases are probably rare.

=head2 User IDs

A token starting with a dollar sign (C<"$">) immediately followed by a user
name evaluates to that user's user ID. It is assumed that user names consist
entirely of letters, digits, and dot (C<".">), dash (C<"-">), and underscore
characters (C<"_">). All non-I<ASCII> characters (I<UTF-8> or I<ISO-8859-*>)
are considered to be "letters".

The token C<$$> evaluates to the current user's user ID.

=head2 Group IDs

A token starting with an at sign (C<"@">) immediately followed by a group
name evaluates to that group's group ID. It is assumed that group names
consist entirely of letters, digits, and dot (C<".">), dash (C<"-">), and
underscore characters (C<"_">). All non-I<ASCII> characters (I<UTF-8> or
I<ISO-8859-*>) are considered to be "letters".

The token C<@@> evaluates to the current user's primary group ID.

=head2 Dates and date/times

Dates and date/times can be specified between square brackets (C<"[]">)
(i.e.,
S<C<[>I<yyyy>C</>I<mm>C</>I<dd>C<]>> and
S<C<[>I<yyyy>C</>I<mm>C</>I<dd> I<hh>C<:>I<mm>C<:>I<ss>C<.>I<nnnnnnnnn>C<]>>). They
are interpreted as being in the local time zone. If the year is specified as
a number below 100, then it is interpreted as being a year in the current
century. Hours must be in 24-hour time, not 12-hour time. Trailing zero
digits of the nanoseconds component are optional. The nanoseconds component
itself is optional if it is zero (i.e.,
S<C<[>I<yyyy>C</>I<mm>C</>I<dd> I<hh>C<:>I<mm>C<:>I<ss>C<]>>). The seconds
component is optional if it is also zero (i.e.,
S<C<[>I<yyyy>C</>I<mm>C</>I<dd> I<hh>C<:>I<mm>C<]>>). The minutes component
is optional if it is also zero (i.e.,
S<C<[>I<yyyy>C</>I<mm>C</>I<dd> I<hh>C<]>>). The hours component is optional
if it is also zero (i.e., midnight). Then, it's just a date. Dates and
date/times evaluate to the number of nanoseconds since the I<UNIX> Epoch.

Note that if the month, day, hours, minutes, or seconds are outside their
valid ranges, the date or date/time is normalized so that, for example, the
40th of October is interpreted as the 9th of November, and the time
C<25:90:90> is interpreted as C<2:31:30> the following day. See I<mktime(3)>
for details. It is an error if the nanosecond value is outside its valid
range.

=head2 Functions

Functions can be defined to give names to expressions, and to make those
names available for use in subsequent expressions. Function names can't be
the same as the names of any existing functions or built-in symbols.

  f() { return expr; }

Functions can only contain a return statement or expression. The C<return>
keyword and semicolon (C<";">) are optional.

  f() { expr }

Functions can have parameters. Parameter names can't be the same as the
names of any existing functions or built-in symbols.

  f(x, y, z) { (x + y) * z }

Functions with no parameters can be defined and called with or without
parentheses.

  f() { expr }
  g { f }
  g()

A function can only be called if its definition has already been encountered
by the parser. So recursive functions are possible, but mutually recursive
functions are not.

The names of functions and parameters must start with a letter or underscore
character (C<"_">), which can be followed by letters, underscores, and
digits. All non-I<ASCII> characters (I<UTF-8> or I<ISO-8859-*>) are
considered to be "letters".

=head2 Built-in symbols

There are various built-in symbols representing inode metadata (i.e.,
I<stat(2)> structure fields), constants, and other useful information.

=over 4

=item C<dev>

The device number of the device/filesystem that the current candidate file
resides on. This is the C<st_dev> field of the corresponding I<stat(2)>
structure. See the related C<major> and C<minor> built-ins (next) for
extracting the major and minor device numbers from C<dev>.

=item C<major>

The major device number of the device/filesystem that the current candidate
file resides on. This is part of the C<st_dev> field of the corresponding
I<stat(2)> structure.

=item C<minor>

The minor device number of the device/filesystem that the current candidate
file resides on. This is part of the C<st_dev> field of the corresponding
I<stat(2)> structure.

=item C<ino>

The inode number of the current candidate file. This is the C<st_ino> field
of the corresponding I<stat(2)> structure.

=item C<mode>

The mode of the current candidate file. This is the C<st_mode> field of the
corresponding I<stat(2)> structure. This contains the file type and
permissions. The standard library provides the C<type> and C<perm> functions
(among others) for extracting the file type and permissions from C<mode>.

=item C<nlink>

The number of hard links to the current candidate file. This is the
C<st_nlink> field of the corresponding I<stat(2)> structure.

=item C<uid>

The user ID of the owner of the current candidate file. This is the
C<st_uid> field of the corresponding I<stat(2)> structure.

=item C<gid>

The group ID of the group of the current candidate file. This is the
C<st_gid> field of the corresponding I<stat(2)> structure.

=item C<rdev>

The device number of the current candidate file. This is the C<st_rdev>
field of the corresponding I<stat(2)> structure. This is only meaningful for
character devices and block devices. See the related C<rmajor> and C<rminor>
built-ins (next) for extracting the major and minor device numbers from
C<rdev>.

=item C<rmajor>

The major device number of the current candidate file. This is part of the
C<st_rdev> field of the corresponding I<stat(2)> structure. This is only
meaningful for character devices and block devices.

=item C<rminor>

The minor device number of the current candidate file. This is part of the
C<st_rdev> field of the corresponding I<stat(2)> structure. This is only
meaningful for character devices and block devices.

=item C<size>

The size in bytes of the current candidate file. This is the C<st_size>
field of the corresponding I<stat(2)> structure.

For candidate symlinks (that are not followed with the C<-y> or C<-Y>
option), this is the length in bytes of the target path.

For candidate directories that are readable, this is not the C<st_size>
field of the corresponding I<stat(2)> structure. Instead, this is the number
of entries it contains (excluding C<.> and C<..>).

For candidate directories that are unreadable (and everything else), this is
the usual (undocumented) C<st_size> field of the corresponding I<stat(2)>
structure.

=item C<blksize>

The preferred block size for efficient I/O on the current candidate file's
filesystem. This is the C<st_blksize> field of the corresponding I<stat(2)>
structure. On some filesystems (e.g., I<zfs>), this is specific to each
file, rather than to the whole filesystem.

Note that this is unrelated to the C<blocks> built-in (see next).

=item C<blocks>

The number of 512-byte blocks occupied by the current candidate file. This
is the C<st_blocks> field of the corresponding I<stat(2)> structure.

=item C<atime>

The time that the current candidate file was last accessed. This is the
C<st_atime> field of the corresponding I<stat(2)> structure converted to
nanoseconds, and combined with the nanoseconds from C<st_atim.tv_nsec> (or
equivalent).

=item C<mtime>

The time that the current candidate file's contents were last modified. This
is the C<st_mtime> field of the corresponding I<stat(2)> structure converted
to nanoseconds, and combined with the nanoseconds from C<st_mtim.tv_nsec>
(or equivalent).

=item C<ctime>

The time that the current candidate file's inode was last changed. This is
the C<st_ctime> field of the corresponding I<stat(2)> structure converted to
nanoseconds, and combined with nanoseconds from C<st_ctim.tv_nsec> (or
equivalent).

=item C<btime>

The time that the current candidate file was created. This is known as the
file's birth or created time. This is the C<st_birthtim> timestamp field of
the corresponding I<stat(2)> structure (or equivalent) converted to
nanoseconds.

This is not supported on all operating systems (i.e., I<OpenBSD> and
I<NetBSD> lack support), or by all filesystems. When birth times are not
supported, this is zero, or in other words, the I<UNIX> Epoch.

=item C<attr>

On I<Linux>, the current candidate file's I<ext2>-style file attribute bit
mask. Not all file systems support all file attributes. See I<chattr(1)> and
I<lsattr(1)> for details. See C</etc/rawhide.conf.d/attributes> for all the
related predicate functions (e.g., C<immutable>, C<append>, C<nodump>,
C<nocow>, C<dax>, ...).

Note: If the current candidate file is a symlink, it is never followed for
the purpose of obtaining the file attributes. This is a decision made by
I<libe2p>. This is not affected by the C<-y> or C<-Y> options. Also note
that symlinks do not have their own file attributes (i.e., C<attr> is zero).

On I<Linux>, this is only available on systems with I<libe2p>. On I<Linux>
systems without I<libe2p>, this is not a built-in symbol. Instead, this is a
place-holder function that returns zero.

This is also available on I<FreeBSD>, I<OpenBSD>, I<NetBSD>, I<macOS>, and
I<Solaris>. The attributes/flags that are available vary from system to
system. See I<chflags(1)> (or I<chmod(1)> on I<Solaris>) for details. See
C</etc/rawhide.conf.d/attributes> for all the related predicate functions
(e.g., C<uimmutable>, C<uappend>, C<nodump>, C<opaque>, ...).

On other systems (e.g., I<Cygwin>), this doesn't exist at all.

=item C<proj>

On I<Linux>, the current candidate file's I<ext2>-style file project
number. Not all file systems support all file attributes. See I<chattr(1)> and
I<lsattr(1)> for details.

Note: If the current candidate file is a symlink, it is always followed for
the purpose of obtaining the file project. This is not affected by the C<-y>
or C<-Y> options.

Note: This is only available on I<Linux> systems with I<libe2p>. On I<Linux>
systems without I<libe2p>, this is not a built-in symbol. Instead, this is a
place-holder function that returns zero. On other systems, this doesn't
exist at all.

=item C<gen>

On I<Linux>, the current candidate file's I<ext2>-style version/generation
number. Not all file systems support all file attributes. See I<chattr(1)>
and I<lsattr(1)> for details.

Note: If the current candidate file is a symlink, it is always followed for
the purpose of obtaining the file version/generation. This is not affected
by the C<-y> or C<-Y> options.

Note: This is only available on I<Linux> systems with I<libe2p>. On I<Linux>
systems without I<libe2p>, this is not a built-in symbol. Instead, this is a
place-holder function that returns zero. On other systems, this doesn't
exist at all.

=item C<nouser>

This is true (i.e., non-zero) when the current candidate file's C<uid> does
not correspond to any user in the user database (e.g., the local
password file C</etc/passwd>, I<NIS>, and I<LDAP>).

=item C<nogroup>

This is true (i.e., non-zero) when the current candidate file's C<gid> does
not correspond to any group in the group database (e.g., the local group
file C</etc/group>, I<NIS>, and I<LDAP>).

=item C<readable>

This is true (i.e., non-zero) when the current candidate file is readable by
the current user. This uses the I<access(2)> system call, rather than the
file permissions.

=item C<writable>

This is true (i.e., non-zero) when the current candidate file is writable by
the current user. This uses the I<access(2)> system call, rather than the
file permissions.

=item C<executable>

This is true (i.e., non-zero) when the current candidate file is executable
by the current user. This uses the I<access(2)> system call, rather than the
file permissions.

=item C<strlen>

This is the length in bytes of the base name of the current candidate
file. Note that this is zero for the root directory (C</>) which has no base name.

=item C<depth>

This is the depth of the current candidate file relative to the starting
search directory. The starting search directory itself has depth C<0>. Its
children have depth C<1>, and so on.

=item C<prune>

This always evaluates to true (i.e., non-zero), and as a side-effect, causes
the directory tree being searched to be "pruned". This means that the
current candidate file will not match, and if it is a directory, it will not
be searched. This can be used to speed up a search.

C<prune> needs to be used with the C<?:> or C<||> or C<&&> operator (see
above) to conditionally skip part of a directory tree and search the rest.

C<prune> and the C<-D> (depth-first) option are incompatible. When the C<-D>
option is used, C<prune> will not work. It will not prevent searching below
the current candidate path. The same applies to the C<-U> (unlink) option,
which implies the C<-D> option.

Note: This is counter-intuitive. C<prune> evaluates to true, even though it
effectively causes the file test expression as a whole to evaluate to false
(i.e., zero), in order to prevent the current candidate file from
matching. The reason that C<prune> evaluates to true rather than false, is to make it
possible to have expressions like S<C<(bad && prune || good)>> as a syntactic
alternative to S<C<(bad ? prune : good)>>.

Note: The C<prune> and C<trim> built-ins are very similar (see next). They
both prevent searching below the current candidate path. The only difference
between them is whether or not the current candidate path itself is also
prevented from matching. Use C<prune> when the current candidate path needs
to be excluded. Use C<trim> when it needs to be included. You can think of
C<prune> as a heavy C<trim>.

=item C<trim>

This always evaluates to true (i.e., non-zero), and as a side-effect, causes
the directory tree being searched to be "trimmed". This means that if the
current candidate file is a directory, it will not be searched (like
C<prune>). Unlike C<prune>, the current candidate file itself is not
prevented from matching. So this has no side-effect when the current
candidate file is not a directory. This can be used to speed up a search.

C<trim> needs to be used with the C<?:> or C<||> or C<&&> operator (see
above) to conditionally skip part of a directory tree and search the rest.

C<trim> and the C<-D> (depth-first) option are incompatible. When the C<-D>
option is used, C<trim> will not work. It will not prevent searching below
the current candidate path. The same applies to the C<-U> (unlink) option,
which implies the C<-D> option.

Note: The C<trim> and C<prune> built-ins are very similar (see above). They
both prevent searching below the current candidate path. The only difference
between them is whether or not the current candidate path itself is also
prevented from matching. Use C<trim> when the current candidate path needs
to be included. Use C<prune> when it needs to be excluded. You can think of
C<trim> as a light C<prune>.

=item C<exit>

This always evaluates to true (i.e., non-zero), and as a side-effect, causes
the search to terminate immediately after the current candidate file. This
can be used to find the first matching file, and then stop.

C<exit> needs to be used with the C<?:> or C<||> or C<&&> operator (see
above) to conditionally terminate the search.

C<exit> can be used in combination with C<prune> and/or C<trim> (see above)
(e.g., S<C<bad && prune || good && exit>>).

=item C<now>

The current time (when I<rh(1)> started) in nanoseconds since the I<UNIX>
Epoch.

Note that timers on different systems have different resolutions. I<Linux>,
I<FreeBSD>, I<OpenBSD>, and I<NetBSD> have nanosecond precision. I<macOS>
and I<Cygwin> have microsecond precision. I<Solaris> has millisecond
precision.

=item C<today>

The time last midnight (local time) in nanoseconds since the I<UNIX> Epoch.

=item C<second>

The number of nanoseconds in one second.

=item C<minute>

The number of nanoseconds in a minute.

=item C<hour>

The number of nanoseconds in an hour.

=item C<day>

The number of nanoseconds in a day.

=item C<week>

The number of nanoseconds in a week.

=item C<month>

The average number of nanoseconds in a month.

=item C<year>

The average number of nanoseconds in a year.

=item C<IFMT>

The same as the C<S_IFMT> bit mask from I<C>'s C<< <sys/stat.h> >> header
file. This bit mask represents the bits in the C<mode> that represent the
file type. The file type is S<C<(mode & IFMT>)> (see next), and the file
permissions are S<C<(mode & ~IFMT)>> (see below).

=item C<IFREG>, C<IFDIR>, C<IFLNK>, C<IFCHR>, C<IFBLK>, C<IFSOCK>, C<IFIFO>, C<IFDOOR>, C<IFWHT>

The same as the corresponding C<"S_"> values from I<C>'s C<< <sys/stat.h> >>
header file. These values correspond to the different types of filesystem
entry (i.e., regular file, directory, symbolic link, character device, block
device, socket, fifo/pipe, door, and whiteout, respectively). C<IFDOOR> only
applies to I<Solaris>. C<IFWHT> only applies to I<macOS>.

=item C<ISUID>, C<ISGID>, C<ISVTX>

The same as the corresponding C<"S_"> bit masks from I<C>'s C<< <sys/stat.h>
>> header file. These bit masks correspond to the setuid, setgid, and sticky
bits in file permissions (i.e., C<--S------>, C<-----S--->, and
C<--------T>, respectively (aka C<04000>, C<02000>, and C<01000>)).

=item C<IRWXU>, C<IRUSR>, C<IWUSR>, C<IXUSR>

The same as the corresponding C<"S_"> bit masks from I<C>'s C<< <sys/stat.h>
>> header file. These bit masks correspond to the user/owner file
permissions (i.e., C<rwx------>, C<r-------->, C<-w------->, and
C<--x------>, respectively (aka C<0700>, C<0400>, C<0200>, and C<0100>)).

=item C<IRWXG>, C<IRGRP>, C<IWGRP>, C<IXGRP>

The same as the corresponding C<"S_"> bit masks from I<C>'s C<< <sys/stat.h>
>> header file. These bit masks correspond to the group file permissions
(i.e., C<---rwx--->, C<---r----->, C<----w---->, and C<-----x--->,
respectively (aka C<0070>, C<0040>, C<0020>, and C<0010>)).

=item C<IRWXO>, C<IROTH>, C<IWOTH>, C<IXOTH>

The same as the corresponding C<"S_"> bit masks from I<C>'s C<< <sys/stat.h>
>> header file. These bit masks correspond to the other/world file
permissions (i.e., C<------rwx>, C<------r-->, C<-------w->, and
C<--------x>, respectively (aka C<0007>, C<0004>, C<0002>, and C<0001>)).

=item C<texists>

This is true (i.e., non-zero) when the current candidate file is a symlink
whose ultimate target exists (i.e., when I<rh(1)> can obtain its I<stat(2)>
structure information). Note that a false value (i.e., zero) might be due to
permissions, rather than non-existence.

It should be used with the C<?:> or C<||> or C<&&> operator (see above) to
conditionally use any of the following I<stat(2)> structure fields relating
to symlink targets. Unless the target exists, their values are all zero and
meaningless.

Note: The C<-Y> option is incompatible with this built-in. The only symlinks
seen will be broken ones, and this built-in will return zero.

Note: Even without the C<-y> or C<-Y> option (so symlinks are not followed
for the purpose of searching), symlinks are followed for the purpose of
obtaining the I<stat(2)> structure information of the current candidate
symlink's ultimate target so as to support the following target-related
built-in symbols.

=item C<tdev>

The device number of the device/filesystem that the current candidate
symlink's ultimate target resides on. This is the C<st_dev> field of the
corresponding I<stat(2)> structure. See the related C<tmajor> and C<tminor>
built-ins (next) for extracting the major and minor device numbers from
C<tdev>.

This should only be used when the current candidate file is a symlink, and
when its ultimate target exists (i.e., when C<texists> is true). Otherwise,
this is zero.

Note: The C<-Y> option is incompatible with this built-in. The only symlinks
seen will be broken ones, and this built-in will return zero.

=item C<tmajor>

The major device number of the device/filesystem that the current candidate
symlink's ultimate target resides on. This is part of the C<st_dev> field of
the corresponding I<stat(2)> structure.

This should only be used when the current candidate file is a symlink, and
when its ultimate target exists (i.e., when C<texists> is true). Otherwise,
this is zero.

Note: The C<-Y> option is incompatible with this built-in. The only symlinks
seen will be broken ones, and this built-in will return zero.

=item C<tminor>

The minor device number of the device/filesystem that the current candidate
symlink's ultimate target resides on. This is part of the C<st_dev> field of
the corresponding I<stat(2)> structure.

This should only be used when the current candidate file is a symlink, and
when its ultimate target exists (i.e., when C<texists> is true). Otherwise,
this is zero.

Note: The C<-Y> option is incompatible with this built-in. The only symlinks
seen will be broken ones, and this built-in will return zero.

=item C<tino>

The inode number of the current candidate symlink's ultimate target. This is
the C<st_ino> field of the corresponding I<stat(2)> structure.

This should only be used when the current candidate file is a symlink, and
when its ultimate target exists (i.e., when C<texists> is true). Otherwise,
this is zero.

Note: The C<-Y> option is incompatible with this built-in. The only symlinks
seen will be broken ones, and this built-in will return zero.

=item C<tmode>

The mode of the current candidate symlink's ultimate target. This is the
C<st_mode> field of the corresponding I<stat(2)> structure. This contains
the file type and permissions. The standard library provides the C<ttype>
and C<tperm> functions (among others) for extracting the file type and
permissions from C<tmode>.

This should only be used when the current candidate file is a symlink, and
when its ultimate target exists (i.e., when C<texists> is true). Otherwise,
this is zero.

Note: The C<-Y> option is incompatible with this built-in. The only symlinks
seen will be broken ones, and this built-in will return zero.

=item C<tnlink>

The number of hard links to the current candidate symlink's ultimate
target. This is the C<st_nlink> field of the corresponding I<stat(2)> structure.

This should only be used when the current candidate file is a symlink, and
when its ultimate target exists (i.e., when C<texists> is true). Otherwise,
this is zero.

Note: The C<-Y> option is incompatible with this built-in. The only symlinks
seen will be broken ones, and this built-in will return zero.

=item C<tuid>

The user ID of the owner of the current candidate symlink's ultimate
target. This is the C<st_uid> field of the corresponding I<stat(2)> structure.

This should only be used when the current candidate file is a symlink, and
when its ultimate target exists (i.e., when C<texists> is true). Otherwise,
this is zero.

Note: The C<-Y> option is incompatible with this built-in. The only symlinks
seen will be broken ones, and this built-in will return zero.

=item C<tgid>

The group ID of the group of the current candidate symlink's ultimate
target. This is the C<st_gid> field of the corresponding I<stat(2)>
structure.

This should only be used when the current candidate file is a symlink, and
when its ultimate target exists (i.e., when C<texists> is true). Otherwise,
this is zero.

Note: The C<-Y> option is incompatible with this built-in. The only symlinks
seen will be broken ones, and this built-in will return zero.

=item C<trdev>

The device number of the current candidate symlink's ultimate target. This
is the C<st_rdev> field of the corresponding I<stat(2)> structure. This is
only meaningful for character devices and block devices. See the related
C<trmajor> and C<trminor> built-ins (next) for extracting the major and
minor device numbers from C<trdev>.

This should only be used when the current candidate file is a symlink, and
when its ultimate target exists (i.e., when C<texists> is true). Otherwise,
this is zero.

Note: The C<-Y> option is incompatible with this built-in. The only symlinks
seen will be broken ones, and this built-in will return zero.

=item C<trmajor>

The major device number of the current candidate symlink's ultimate
target. This is part of the C<st_rdev> field of the corresponding I<stat(2)>
structure. This is only meaningful for character devices and block devices.

This should only be used when the current candidate file is a symlink, and
when its ultimate target exists (i.e., when C<texists> is true). Otherwise,
this is zero.

Note: The C<-Y> option is incompatible with this built-in. The only symlinks
seen will be broken ones, and this built-in will return zero.

=item C<trminor>

The minor device number of the current candidate symlink's ultimate
target. This is part of the C<st_rdev> field of the corresponding I<stat(2)>
structure. This is only meaningful for character devices and block devices.

This should only be used when the current candidate file is a symlink, and
when its ultimate target exists (i.e., when C<texists> is true). Otherwise,
this is zero.

Note: The C<-Y> option is incompatible with this built-in. The only symlinks
seen will be broken ones, and this built-in will return zero.

=item C<tsize>

The size in bytes of the current candidate symlink's ultimate target
file. This is the C<st_size> field of the corresponding I<stat(2)> structure.

For an ultimate target that is a readable directory, this is not the
C<st_size> field of the corresponding I<stat(2)> structure. Instead, this is
the number of entries it contains (excluding C<.> and C<..>).

For an ultimate target that is an unreadable directory (and everything
else), this is the usual (undocumented) C<st_size> field of the
corresponding I<stat(2)> structure.

This should only be used when the current candidate file is a symlink, and
when its ultimate target exists (i.e., when C<texists> is true). Otherwise,
this is zero.

Note: The C<-Y> option is incompatible with this built-in. The only symlinks
seen will be broken ones, and this built-in will return zero.

=item C<tblksize>

The preferred block size for efficient I/O on the current candidate
symlink's ultimate target's filesystem. This is the C<st_blksize> field of
the corresponding I<stat(2)> structure. On some filesystems (e.g., I<zfs>),
this is specific to each file, rather than to the whole filesystem.

Note that this is unrelated to the C<tblocks> built-in (see next).

This should only be used when the current candidate file is a symlink, and
when its ultimate target exists (i.e., when C<texists> is true). Otherwise,
this is zero.

Note: The C<-Y> option is incompatible with this built-in. The only symlinks
seen will be broken ones, and this built-in will return zero.

=item C<tblocks>

The number of 512-byte blocks occupied by the current candidate symlink's
ultimate target. This is the C<st_blocks> field of the corresponding
I<stat(2)> structure.

This should only be used when the current candidate file is a symlink, and
when its ultimate target exists (i.e., when C<texists> is true). Otherwise,
this is zero.

Note: The C<-Y> option is incompatible with this built-in. The only symlinks
seen will be broken ones, and this built-in will return zero.

=item C<tatime>

The time that the current candidate symlink's ultimate target was last
accessed. This is the C<st_atime> field of the corresponding I<stat(2)>
structure converted to nanoseconds, and combined with the nanoseconds from
C<st_atim.tv_nsec> (or equivalent).

This should only be used when the current candidate file is a symlink, and
when its ultimate target exists (i.e., when C<texists> is true). Otherwise,
this is zero.

Note: The C<-Y> option is incompatible with this built-in. The only symlinks
seen will be broken ones, and this built-in will return zero.

=item C<tmtime>

The time that the current candidate symlink's ultimate target's contents
were last modified. This is the C<st_mtime> field of the corresponding
I<stat(2)> structure converted to nanoseconds, and combined with the
nanoseconds from C<st_mtim.tv_nsec> (or equivalent).

This should only be used when the current candidate file is a symlink, and
when its ultimate target exists (i.e., when C<texists> is true). Otherwise,
this is zero.

Note: The C<-Y> option is incompatible with this built-in. The only symlinks
seen will be broken ones, and this built-in will return zero.

=item C<tctime>

The time that the current candidate symlink's ultimate target's inode was
last changed. This is the C<st_ctime> field of the corresponding I<stat(2)>
structure converted to nanoseconds, and combined with the nanoseconds from
C<st_ctim.tv_nsec> (or equivalent).

This should only be used when the current candidate file is a symlink, and
when its ultimate target exists (i.e., when C<texists> is true). Otherwise,
this is zero.

Note: The C<-Y> option is incompatible with this built-in. The only symlinks
seen will be broken ones, and this built-in will return zero.

=item C<tbtime>

The time that the current candidate symlink's ultimate target was
created. This is known as the target's birth or created time. This is the
C<st_birthtim> timestamp field of the corresponding I<stat(2)> structure (or
equivalent) converted to nanoseconds.

This is not supported on all operating systems (i.e., I<OpenBSD> and
I<NetBSD> lack support), or by all filesystems. When birth times are not
supported, this is zero, or in other words, the I<UNIX> Epoch.

This should only be used when the current candidate file is a symlink, and
when its ultimate target exists (i.e., when C<texists> is true). Otherwise,
this is zero.

Note: The C<-Y> option is incompatible with this built-in. The only symlinks
seen will be broken ones, and this built-in will return zero.

=item C<tstrlen>

This is the length in bytes of the base name of the current candidate
symlink's immediate target path. Note that this is zero if the target path
is the root directory (C</>) which has no base name.

This should only be used when the current candidate file is a
symlink. Otherwise, this is zero. But the ultimate target does not need to exist.

Note: The C<-Y> option affects this built-in. The only symlinks seen will be
broken ones, but this built-in will still return the correct length.

=back

=head2 Pattern matching

By default, string literals (C<">I<pattern>C<">) contain shell-style file
glob patterns that are matched against each candidate file's base name. See
the B<Pattern modifiers> section below for variations.

Pattern strings evaluate to true (i.e., non-zero) if the pattern match
succeeds, or false (i.e., zero) otherwise.

The following I<POSIX> glob pattern notation is supported on all platforms:

=over 4

=item C<?>

Matches any single character. A leading dot character (C<".">) is not
treated as a special character. For example, C<?profile> would match
C<.profile>. This is unlike C</bin/sh> globbing behaviour, but it is like
I<POSIX find(1)> behaviour.

=item C<*>

Matches any string of characters, including the empty string. A leading dot
character (C<".">) is not treated as a special character. For example, C<*>
would match C<.profile>. This is unlike C</bin/sh> globbing behaviour, but
it is like I<POSIX find(1)> behaviour.

=item C<[abc]>

Matches any single character in the given set. Ranges of characters can be
specified (e.g., C<[a-z0-9]>).

=item C<[!abc]>

Matches any single character that is not in the given set. Ranges of
characters can be specified (e.g., C<[!A-Z]>).

And although it's non-standard (i.e., officially undefined), on most systems
you can use the more familiar C<^> instead of C<!> to complement the set in
character classes (e.g., C<[^abc]>), but not on I<Solaris>.

=back

Locale-specific character class notation should also be available on all
platforms (i.e., named character classes like C<[[:lower:]]>, collating
symbols like C<[[.a-acute.]]>, and equivalence class expressions like
C<[[=a=]]>), but not all locales support them all.

The special meanings of C<?>, C<*>, C<[>, C<!>, C<^>, C<->, C<]>, and C<\>
can be removed by quoting them with a preceding backslash character
(C<"\">). Note: When quoting a backslash in the pattern with a preceding
backslash, both backslashes need to be quoted in the string literal with
backslashes.

The following subset of I<ksh> extended glob pattern notation is supported
on platforms with S<I<GNU glibc>> (i.e., I<Linux>):

=over 4

=item C<?(a|b|c)>

Matches if zero or one occurrences of any of the sub-patterns match the
text.

=item C<*(a|b|c)>

Matches if zero or more occurrences of any of the sub-patterns match the
text.

=item C<+(a|b|c)>

Matches if one or more occurrences of any of the sub-patterns match the
text.

=item C<@(a|b|c)>

Matches if exactly one occurrence of any of the sub-patterns matches the
text.

=item C<!(a|b|c)>

Matches if the text cannot be matched by any of the sub-patterns.

=back

The special meanings of C<?>, C<*>, C<+>, C<@>, C<!>, C<(>, C<|>, C<)>, and
C<\> can be removed by quoting them with a preceding backslash character
(C<"\">). Note: When quoting a backslash in the pattern with a preceding
backslash, both backslashes need to be quoted in the string literal with
backslashes.

The output of S<C<rh --help>> states if I<ksh> extended glob pattern
notation is available on the local system.

See I<fnmatch(3)> and I<glob(7)> for more details.

=head2 Pattern modifiers

Pattern modifiers (C<">I<pattern>C<".>I<modifier>) are suffixes to string
literals that change how the string is interpreted, and what is done with
it. There must be no spaces around the dot between the string literal and
the modifier name.

Pattern modifier names can be supplied in full (e.g.,
C<">I<pattern>C<".path>), but a unique prefix is sufficient (e.g.,
C<">I<pattern>C<".pat>, C<">I<pattern>C<".pa>, or C<">I<pattern>C<".p>). For
each of the pattern modifiers below, both the full name and the shortest
unique prefix are shown.

The following modifiers exist, but not all are available on all systems.

=over 4

=item C<path> (or C<p>)

Apply the glob pattern to each candidate file's full path starting from the
search directory, not just its base name. Slash characters (C<"/">) are not
treated as special characters. For example, C<"./sr*sc".path> would match
C<./src/misc>.

Note: Since a slash character can never appear in a file's base name, if a
glob pattern string with no pattern modifier does contain a slash character
(e.g., C<"/">), then instead of attempting (and failing) to match it against
the file's base name, an implicit C<path> pattern modifier is assumed (e.g.,
C<"/".path>), and it will be matched against the file's full path starting
from the search directory instead. This behaviour can be suppressed by
setting the environment variable C<RAWHIDE_NO_IMPLICIT_PATH_MODIFIER=1>.

=item C<link> (or C<l>)

Apply the glob pattern to each candidate symlink's target path, rather than
its base name. Slash characters (C<"/">) are not treated as special
characters. For example, C<"./sr*sc".path> would match C<./src/misc>.

=item C<body> (or C<b>)

Apply the glob pattern to each candidate file's contents, rather than its
base name. Slash characters (C<"/">) are not treated as special characters.

Note that this is an expensive pattern modifier because each candidate file
is read in its entirety to determine whether or not the pattern matches. It
can be worthwhile preceding this with other predicates to reduce the number
and limit the size of candidate files that this is applied to.

This probably shouldn't be used with very large files. It would require a
lot of memory or swap, and on 32-bit systems, the possible file size is also
limited by the available address space. If this is an issue, you can always
use I<grep(1)> via the C<sh> or C<ush> "pattern" modifiers instead.

Also note that this only works with regular files that are readable to the
current user.

Also note that the C<body> and I<ibody> glob pattern modifiers shouldn't be
used with binary files that might contain null bytes. For binary files, use
the C<rebody> or C<reibody> regular expression pattern modifiers instead
(see below).

Note: If the current candidate file is a symlink, its body is unaffected by
the C<-y> or C<-Y> options. For the purpose of this predicate, the symlink
is always followed.

=item C<what> (or C<w>)

Apply the glob pattern to each candidate file's file type description (as
would be output by the I<file(1)> utility), rather than its base name. Slash
characters (C<"/">) are not treated as special characters. This is available
on systems with I<libmagic(3)> installed.

Note that this is an expensive pattern modifier because each candidate file
is at least partially read to determine its file type. It can be worthwhile
preceding this with other predicates to reduce the number of candidate files
that this is applied to.

Also note that this only works well with regular files that are readable to
the current user.

Also note that any errors encountered result in an error message taking the
place of the file type description being matched. To see these error
messages, you can use the C<-L> option with its C<%w> format conversion.

Note: If the current candidate file is a symlink, its file type description
is affected by the C<-y> or C<-Y> options.

=item C<mime> (or C<m>)

Apply the glob pattern to each candidate file's MIME type (including the
character set), rather than its base name. Slash characters (C<"/">) are not
treated as special characters. This is available on systems with
I<libmagic(3)> installed.

Note that this is an expensive pattern modifier because each candidate file
is at least partially read to determine its MIME type. It can be worthwhile
preceding this with other predicates to reduce the number of candidate files
that this is applied to.

Also note that this only works well with regular files that are readable to
the current user.

Also note that any errors encountered result in an error message taking the
place of the MIME type being matched. To see these error messages, you can
use the C<-L> option with its C<%W> format conversion.

Note: If the current candidate file is a symlink, its MIME type is affected
by the C<-y> or C<-Y> options.

=item C<i>

Apply the glob pattern without case-sensitivity. This is available on most
systems, but maybe not all.

The output of S<C<rh --help>> states if case-insensitive glob pattern
matching is available on the local system.

=item C<ipath> (or C<ip>)

Like the C<path> modifier, but apply the glob pattern without
case-sensitivity. This is available on most systems, but maybe not all.

Note: Since a slash character can never appear in a file's base name, if a
glob pattern string with the C<i> pattern modifier does contain a slash
character (e.g., C<"/".i>), then instead of attempting (and failing) to
match it against the file's base name, an implicit C<ipath> pattern modifier
is assumed (e.g., C<"/".ipath>), and it will be matched against the file's
full path starting from the search directory instead. This behaviour can be
suppressed by setting the environment variable
C<RAWHIDE_NO_IMPLICIT_PATH_MODIFIER=1>.

=item C<ilink> (or C<il>)

Like the C<link> modifier, but apply the glob pattern without
case-sensitivity. This is available on most systems, but maybe not all.

=item C<ibody> (or C<ib>)

Like the C<body> modifier, but apply the glob pattern without
case-sensitivity.

=item C<iwhat> (or C<iw>)

Like the C<what> modifier, but apply the glob pattern without
case-sensitivity. This is available on most systems with I<libmagic(3)>
installed, but maybe not all.

=item C<imime> (or C<im>)

Like the C<mime> modifier, but apply the glob pattern without
case-sensitivity. This is available on most systems with I<libmagic(3)>
installed, but maybe not all.

=item C<re>

Match each candidate file's base name against a I<Perl>-compatible regular
expression (regex) instead of a glob pattern. By default, the file's base
name is considered to be a single "line" (i.e., as if the regular expression
started with C<(?s)>, or I<Perl>'s C</s> modifier were used). See
I<perlre(1)>, I<pcre2pattern(3)>, and I<pcre2syntax(3)> for details. This is
available on systems that have I<libpcre2-8> installed.

The output of S<C<rh --help>> states whether or not I<Perl>-compatible
regular expressions are available on the local system.

Regex patterns are not automatically anchored to the start and end, and so
do not have to match the entire text.

The following I<PCRE2> options are always enabled by default, unless
otherwise stated.

=over 4

=item C<PCRE2_DOTALL>

The C<.> meta-character matches any character, including the newline
character. This prevents surprises when files have newline characters in
their names. This is like I<Perl>'s C</s> modifier.

This option is enabled by default when matching file names, paths, symlink
target paths, and MIME types (e.g., C<re>, C<repath>, C<relink>, and
C<remime>) because it can be helpful when faced with malicious paths. These
are all considered to be a single "line" (even if they actually contain
newlines). It is not enabled by default when matching everything else (e.g.,
C<reacl>, C<redacl>, C<reea>, C<rewhat>, and C<rebody>). These are all
considered to be multiple lines. It can be enabled by default in all cases
by setting the environment variable C<RAWHIDE_PCRE2_DOTALL_ALWAYS=1>. It can
be enabled for individual matches by starting the regular expression with
C<(?s)>. It can be disabled for individual matches by starting the regular
expression with C<(?-s)>. Note that, even when C<.> doesn't match a newline,
there are other patterns that still match a newline (e.g., C<\s>, C<\v>,
C<\H>, C<\W>, C<\D>, C<[^anything-that-does-not-include-newline]>).

=item C<PCRE2_MULTILINE>

The C<^> meta-character matches after every internal newline character, not
just at the start. The C<$> meta-character matches before every internal
newline character, not just at the end. This is useful for access control
list (ACL) and extended attribute (EA) searches (see below) where the text
can occupy multiple lines. This is like I<Perl>'s C</m> modifier.

This option is not enabled by default when matching file names, paths,
symlink target paths, and MIME types (e.g., C<re>, C<repath>, C<relink>, and
C<remime>) because it can be unhelpful when faced with malicious
paths. These are all considered to be a single "line" (even if they actually
contain newlines). It is only enabled by default when matching everything
else (e.g., C<reacl>, C<redacl>, C<reea>, C<rewhat>, and C<rebody>). These
are all considered to be multiple lines. It can be enabled by default in all
cases by setting the environment variable
C<RAWHIDE_PCRE2_MULTILINE_ALWAYS=1>. It can be enabled for individual
matches by starting the regular expression with C<(?m)>. It can be disabled
for individual matches by starting the regular expression with C<(?-m)>.

=item C<PCRE2_DOLLAR_ENDONLY>

The C<$> meta-character only matches the end of the string, not also before
a newline at the end of the string. This only applies when
C<PCRE2_MULTILINE> is not also set.

=item C<PCRE2_EXTENDED>

Ignore (outside character classes) most whitespace characters and everything
from a hash character (C<"#">) until the end of the line. Matching a
whitespace or hash character requires quoting it with a preceding backslash
character (C<"\">). Complex regex patterns can be made more readable this
way, and it enables comments in regex patterns. This is like I<Perl>'s C</x>
modifier.

=item C<PCRE2_EXTENDED_MORE>

Ignore space and tab characters inside character classes. Matching a space
or tab in a character class requires quoting it with a preceding backslash
character (C<"\">). Complex character classes can be made more readable this
way. This is like I<Perl>'s C</xx> modifier.

=back

Note that the regex pattern and the text being matched are generally assumed
to be encoded as I<UTF-8>. If you need to suppress this assumption, set the
environment variable C<RAWHIDE_PCRE2_NOT_UTF8_DEFAULT=1>. When this
environment variable is set, individual regex patterns can still enable
I<UTF-8> interpretation with a leading C<(*UTF)>. This I<UTF-8> assumption
is made when the locale uses I<UTF-8> (i.e., when the environment variable
C<LC_ALL>, C<LC_CTYPE>, or C<LANG>, includes C<"UTF-8">). When the locale
doesn't use I<UTF-8>, and you want I<rh> to assume that everything is
I<UTF-8> anyway, set the environment variable
C<RAWHIDE_PCRE2_UTF8_DEFAULT=1>.

=item C<repath> (or C<rep>)

Like the C<re> modifier, but apply the regex to each candidate file's full
path starting from the search directory, not just its base name. By default,
the path is considered to be a single "line" (i.e., as if the regular
expression started with C<(?s)>, or I<Perl>'s C</s> modifier were used).

Note: Since a slash character can never appear in a file's base name, if a
regex pattern string with the C<re> pattern modifier does contain a slash
character (e.g., C<"/".re>), then instead of attempting (and failing) to
match it against the file's base name, an implicit C<repath> pattern
modifier is assumed (e.g., C<"/".repath>), and it will be matched against
the file's full path starting from the search directory instead. This
behaviour can be suppressed by setting the environment variable
C<RAWHIDE_NO_IMPLICIT_PATH_MODIFIER=1>.

=item C<relink> (or C<rel>)

Like the C<re> modifier, but apply the regex to each candidate symlink's
target path, rather than its base name. By default, the symlink's target
path is considered to be a single "line" (i.e., as if the regular expression
started with C<(?s)>, or I<Perl>'s C</s> modifier were used).

=item C<rebody> (or C<reb>)

Like the C<re> modifier, but apply the regex to each candidate file's
contents, rather than its base name. See C<body> above for more details. By
default, the file's contents are considered to be multiple lines (i.e., as
if the regular expression started with C<(?m)>, or I<Perl>'s C</m> modifier
were used). But note that this is not restricted to text files. Matches can
be performed against binary files as well.

But if you need to match binary data in a binary file, when the current
locale uses I<UTF-8>, you will need to set the environment variable
C<RAWHIDE_PCRE2_NOT_UTF8_DEFAULT=1> (or C<LANG=C>) so as to prevent assuming
that the file is encoded in I<UTF-8> as described above.

=item C<rewhat> (or C<rew>)

Like the C<re> modifier, but apply the regex to each candidate file's file
type description, rather than its base name. By default, the file's type
description is considered to be multiple lines (i.e., as if the regular
expression started with C<(?m)>, or I<Perl>'s C</m> modifier were
used). This is available on systems that have I<libpcre2-8> and I<libmagic>
installed. See C<what> above for more details.

=item C<remime> (or C<rem>)

Like the C<re> modifier, but apply the regex to each candidate file's MIME
type, rather than its base name. By default, the file's MIME type is
considered to be a single "line" (i.e., as if the regular expression started
with C<(?s)>, or I<Perl>'s C</s> modifier were used). This is available on
systems that have I<libpcre2-8> and I<libmagic> installed. See C<mime> above
for more details.

=item C<rei>

Like the C<re> modifier, but apply the regex without case-sensitivity.

=item C<reipath> (or C<reip>)

Like the C<repath> modifier, but apply the regex without case-sensitivity.

Note: Since a slash character can never appear in a file's base name, if a
regex pattern string with the C<rei> pattern modifier does contain a slash
character (e.g., C<"/".rei>), then instead of attempting (and failing) to
match it against the file's base name, an implicit C<reipath> pattern
modifier is assumed (e.g., C<"/".reipath>), and it will be matched against
the file's full path starting from the search directory instead. This
behaviour can be suppressed by setting the environment variable
C<RAWHIDE_NO_IMPLICIT_PATH_MODIFIER=1>.

=item C<reilink> (or C<reil>)

Like the C<relink> modifier, but apply the regex without case-sensitivity.

=item C<reibody> (or C<reib>)

Like the C<rebody> modifier, but apply the regex without case-sensitivity.

=item C<reiwhat> (or C<reiw>)

Like the C<rewhat> modifier, but apply the regex without case-sensitivity.

=item C<reimime> (or C<reim>)

Like the C<remime> modifier, but apply the regex without case-sensitivity.

=item C<acl> (or C<a>)

Apply the glob pattern to each candidate file's access control list (ACL),
rather than its base name.

This is available on systems with I<"POSIX"> ACLs (e.g., I<Linux>,
I<FreeBSD>, I<Solaris> (for I<ufs>), and I<Cygwin>), and I<NFSv4> ACLs
(e.g., I<FreeBSD> and I<Solaris> (for I<zfs>)), and I<macOS> with its own
I<Extended> ACLs. I<OpenBSD> and I<NetBSD> don't do ACLs. See I<acl(2)> or
I<acl(3)> or I<acl(5)> for more details.

The output of S<C<rh --help>> states if access control lists are available on
the local system.

I<"POSIX"> ACL text consists of multiple lines, each terminated by a newline
character. It looks like this:

  user::rwx
  user:name:rwx
  group::rwx
  group:name:rwx
  mask::rwx
  other::rwx

I<NFSv4> ACL text comes in two forms. In the compact form, the items look
like these:

      owner@:rwxp--aARWcCos:-------:allow
   user:name:rwxp--aARWcCos:-------:allow
      group@:r-x---a-R-c--s:-------:allow
  group:name:r-x---a-R-c--s:-------:allow
   everyone@:r-x---a-R-c--s:-------:allow

In the non-compact form, the items each look something like this:

  owner@:read_data/write_data/append_data/read_xattr/write_xattr
    /execute/read_attributes/write_attributes/read_acl/write_acl
    /write_owner/synchronize:allow

Searches can be made for either form. But be warned that the permission
names in the non-compact form do not always appear in the same order (at
least on I<Solaris>).

On I<FreeBSD>, I<NFSv4> ACL text has each item on a separate line,
terminated by a newline character, and there are leading spaces for vertical
alignment before each item. On I<Solaris>, I<NFSv4> ACL text is a
comma-separated list of items with no leading spaces and no newline
character.

I<macOS> has its own I<Extended> ACLs that look like this:

  !#acl 1
  user:906E2CAD-E971-12D8-ACB9-000A95DF094B:drew:502:allow:write

An easy way to see what ACLs look like on your system is:

  $ rh -L '%p\n%z\n'

But bear in mind that this reformats multiple lines into a comma-separated
list. That can be avoided if the locale uses I<UTF-8> and I<jq(1)> is
installed:

  $ rh -L %j | jq -r .access_control_list

Note that glob patterns are anchored to the start and end, and so must match
the entire text.

On I<Solaris>, ACLs are always present by default, even if they are
trivially identical to the file permission bits. This can be convenient, but
if it seems like noise, it can be silenced (but only on I<Solaris>) by
setting the environment variable C<RAWHIDE_SOLARIS_ACL_NO_TRIVIAL=1>.

=item C<iacl> (or C<ia>)

Like the C<acl> modifier, but apply the glob pattern without
case-sensitivity. This might not be available on all systems.

=item C<reacl> (or C<rea>)

Like the C<acl> modifier, but match each candidate file's access control
list (ACL) against a I<Perl>-compatible regular expression (regex) instead
of a glob pattern. By default, the file's ACL is considered to be multiple
lines (i.e., as if the regular expression started with C<(?m)>, or the
I<Perl> C</m> modifier were used). This is available on systems that have
I<libpcre2-8> installed, and supported access control lists. See the C<re>
modifier above for more information.

=item C<reiacl> (or C<reia>)

Like the C<reacl> modifier, but apply the regex without case-sensitivity.

=item C<dacl> (or C<d>)

Apply the glob pattern to each candidate directory's default access control
list (ACL), rather than its base name. This is only meaningful for
directories.

This is available on systems with I<"POSIX"> ACLs (e.g., I<Linux>,
I<FreeBSD> (for I<ufs>), and I<Cygwin>), but not on systems with I<NFSv4>
ACLs (e.g., I<FreeBSD> and I<Solaris> (for I<zfs>)), or S<I<macOS Extended>>
ACLs. I<OpenBSD> and I<NetBSD> don't do ACLs. See I<acl(2)> or I<acl(3)> or
I<acl(5)> for more details.

The output of S<C<rh --help>> states if default access control lists are
available on the local system.

See C<acl> above for details on the content of I<"POSIX"> access control
lists.

Note that glob patterns are anchored to the start and end, and so must match
the entire text.

=item C<idacl> (or C<id>)

Like the C<dacl> modifier, but apply the glob pattern without
case-sensitivity. This might not be available on all systems.

=item C<redacl> (or C<red>)

Like the C<dacl> modifier, but match each candidate directory's default
access control list (ACL) against a I<Perl>-compatible regular expression
(regex) instead of a glob pattern. By default, the directory's default ACL
is considered to be multiple lines (i.e., as if the regular expression
started with C<(?m)>, or the I<Perl> C</m> modifier were used). This is
available on systems that have I<libpcre2-8> installed, and I<"POSIX">
access control lists. See the C<re> modifier above for more information.

=item C<reidacl> (or C<reid>)

Like the C<redacl> modifier, but apply the regex without case-sensitivity.

=item C<ea> (or C<e>)

Apply the glob pattern to the encoded extended attributes (EA) text of each
candidate file, rather than its base name.

This is available on I<Linux>, I<FreeBSD>, I<macOS>, I<Solaris>, and
I<Cygwin>. I<OpenBSD> and I<NetBSD> don't do EAs. See I<xattr(1)> or
I<xattr(7)> or I<extattr(2)> or I<fsattr(7)> for more details.

The output of S<C<rh --help>> states if extended attributes are available on
the local system.

The encoded extended attributes text, if any, will be possibly multiple
lines, one per extended attribute, each terminated by a newline
character. Each extended attribute starts with its name. If it also has a value, then
the name is followed by colon and space characters (S<C<": ">>), and then
the value. Note that on I<macOS>, some extended attribute names contain a
colon character, but they aren't typically followed by a space character.

Note that any control characters (i.e., I<ASCII> 0-31, 127) in extended
attribute names or values, and any non-I<ASCII> bytes (i.e., 128-255) in the
values, will be presented as I<C>-like backslash escape sequences such as
C<"\n"> for the newline character, and C<"\0"> for the null character, or as
hexadecimal escape sequences such as C<"\x1b"> for the escape character. Any
backslash characters are quoted with a preceding backslash. Note that commas
are not quoted.

This encoding is the text that patterns must be written to match
against. But you can still match against any text in extended attribute names, and
I<ASCII>-only text in their values, as you normally would.

Note that glob patterns are anchored to the start and end, and so must match
the entire text.

On I<FreeBSD>, extended attributes in the I<user> namespace are presented
with C<"user."> as a prefix to their actual name, and those in the I<system>
namespace are presented with C<"system."> as a name prefix. On I<FreeBSD>,
only the C<root> user may see extended attributes in the I<system>
namespace.

On most systems with extended attributes, the values are typically only up
to a few hundred bytes in size. But on I<Solaris>, extended attributes take
the form of regular files in a special extended attributes directory
"hidden" inside each real file. Entire files can be copied into that special
directory, and they become extended attributes. So extended attributes could
tend to be larger on I<Solaris>.

The default maximum total size for (encoded) extended attributes is 4KiB on
most systems, and 64KiB on I<Solaris>. If this is not enough, extended
attributes will be silently truncated. This affects extended attribute
searching (C<ea>), and the S<C<-L %x>> format conversion. To prevent
truncation, set the environment variable C<RAWHIDE_EA_SIZE> to a positive
integer value that is large enough for your needs. Note that the value must
be the size in bytes. Scale units are not supported.

On I<Solaris>, every file's extended attributes directory contains the
I<SUNWattr_ro> and I<SUNWattr_rw> extended attributes. By default, they are
included for every file that has any other extended attributes. They can be
excluded by setting the environment variable
C<RAWHIDE_SOLARIS_EA_NO_SUNWATTR=1>.

Also on I<Solaris>, since extended attributes are files (of a sort), they
each have their own I<stat(2)> information. By default, this information is
represented as an artificial extended attribute whose name is the name of
the corresponding real extended attribute followed by C<"/stat">. These
artificial extended attributes have the following format:

  name/stat: -rw-r--r-- nlink user group size mtime atime ctime

The I<name> is the name of the corresponding real extended attribute. The
C<"/stat:"> is literal. The I<nlink> is always C<1>. The I<user> and
I<group> are names or numeric IDs. The I<size> is in bytes. The I<mtime>,
I<atime>, and I<ctime> are in I<ISO> date/time format
(I<yyyy>C<->I<mm>C<->I<dd>C<T>I<hh>C<:>I<mm>C<:>I<ss+hhmm>).

This makes it possible on I<Solaris> to search for files by the I<stat(2)>
information of their extended attributes. But it can only be a text-based
search (glob or regex).

These artificial extended attributes can be suppressed by setting the
environment variable C<RAWHIDE_SOLARIS_EA_NO_STATINFO=1>.

=item C<iea> (or C<ie>)

Like the C<ea> modifier, but apply the glob pattern without
case-sensitivity. This might not be available on all systems.

=item C<reea> (or C<ree>)

Like the C<ea> modifier, but match the encoded extended attributes (EA) text
of each candidate file against a I<Perl>-compatible regular expression
(regex) instead of a glob pattern. By default, the file's EAs are considered
to be multiple lines (i.e., as if the regular expression started with
C<(?m)>, or I<Perl>'s C</m> modifier were used). This is available on
systems that have I<libpcre2-8> installed, and supported extended
attributes. See the C<re> modifier above for more information.

=item C<reiea> (or C<reie>)

Like the C<reea> modifier, but apply the regex without case-sensitivity.

=item C<sh> (or C<s>)

This interprets the string literal, not as a pattern at all, but as an
external shell command to execute as if by I<system(3)> (i.e., by C</bin/sh>
or some other I<POSIX>-compliant shell). It evaluates to the exit success
status of the external shell command. If its exit status is zero, then the
value is true (i.e., non-zero). Otherwise, it is false (i.e., zero).

This enables arbitrary command line utilities to contribute to the search
criteria. But be warned, this can be slow, because it involves the creation
of possibly many other processes. But it makes many things possible. To
reduce the number of external shell commands that need to be executed, the
C<sh> "pattern" modifier can be used conditionally with the C<?:> or C<||>
or C<&&> operator (see above).

The string can contain C<%s> which will be replaced with the matching
entry's full path starting from the search directory. It can also contain
C<%S> which will be replaced with the matching entry's base name (or with
C<"/"> when the matching entry is the root directory (C</>) which has no
base name). For example, given the matching file C</etc/passwd>, C<%s> and
C<%S> would be replaced with C<"/etc/passwd"> and C<"passwd">,
respectively. To include a literal per cent sign (C<"%">) in the shell command, use
C<%%>. It is an error if C<%> is not followed by C<s>, C<S>, or C<%>.

There is generally no need to place any quote characters around C<%s> or
C<%S>. To prevent shell command injection, they are replaced with C<"$1">
and C<"$2">, respectively, and the corresponding full path and base name are
passed to C</bin/sh> as separate positional arguments. This avoids the
problem that there is no single way to quote data in a shell command that
works correctly in all syntactic contexts.

This will usually be fine, but if the double quote quoting used when
interpolating C<%s> and C<%S> as C<"$1"> and C<"$2"> is inappropriate for a
particular command, you can instead use C<$1> and C<$2> directly, including
via the shell's B<Parameter Expansion> syntax.

As a special precaution, a leading C<./> will be added to C<%s> or C<%S>
unless it is an absolute path, or relative to the current directory or its
parent directory (i.e., unless it starts with C</> or C<./> or C<../>), so
as to ensure that it cannot be incorrectly interpreted as a command line
option or similar in the shell command being executed. This makes it
unnecessary for you to ever add C<--> before C<%s> or C<%S> to achieve the
same effect. This also means that if the shell command being executed really
needs the base name, and not just a valid file path, then it must use
something like C<"${2#./}"> (rather than C<%S>), so as to remove any leading
C<./>.

Every shell command is executed after safely changing the current working
directory to the directory containing each candidate file. This minimizes
the number of path-based race conditions. So the C<%S> interpolation is more
likely to be useful than the C<%s> interpolation.

And if the user's C<$PATH> environment variable includes the current working
directory, or any other non-absolute paths, that could be dangerous, so they
are automatically removed first.

Note: Since the shell commands are executed from the directory containing
each matching entry, if they do require the matching entry's full path
starting from the search directory (i.e., C<%s>), then it's best if the
starting search paths are all absolute paths, so that C<%s> is always an
absolute path. Otherwise, the shell command might need to change its current
working directory back to the initial working directory. Also note that
C<%s> suffers from many path-based race conditions, which is insecure on
hosts with malicious local actors that have write access to the directory
tree being searched, and so should not generally be used.

=item C<ush> (or C<u>)

Like the C<sh> modifier (see above), except that the command string is
executed by the user's login shell, as specified in the C</etc/passwd> file,
rather than as if by I<system(3)> (i.e., by C</bin/sh> or some other
I<POSIX>-compliant shell).

If the environment variable C<RAWHIDE_USER_SHELL> is set, its value must
specify the absolute path to an alternative shell to use instead of the
user's login shell. This is only available to non-C<root> users (as it could
be dangerous for C<root>). The alternative shell will be invoked in the same
way that the user's login shell would be, which is the same way that
C</bin/sh> is invoked by the C<sh> modifier.

The user's login shell (or alternative shell) must accept a C<-c> option
which causes it to interpret its first non-option argument as a command
string to execute. It must also accept additional command line arguments
that represent the shell's base name, and the positional parameters for the
command. An exception to this requirement is made for I<csh>, I<tcsh>, and
I<fish>, whose first argument after the command is the command's first
positional parameter, rather than the shell's base name. If the user's login
shell (or alternative shell) isn't named C<csh> or C<tcsh> or C<fish>, and
doesn't take an argument to represent the shell's base name, then you must
set the environment variable C<RAWHIDE_USER_SHELL_LIKE_CSH=1> to cause I<rh>
to invoke it without that argument. The user's login shell (or alternative
shell) must also have command syntax such that C<"$1"> and C<"$2">
represent, respectively, the first and second positional arguments passed to
it on its command line. An exception to this requirement is made for
I<fish>, whose corresponding syntax is C<$argv[1]> and C<$argv[2]>. Any
other non-I<POSIX> shells can only be used if you promise to never use the
C<%s> or C<%S> notation, but instead always use the shell's own notation for
positional parameters, whatever that might be. Note that such shells will
usually also require that you set the environment variable
C<RAWHIDE_USER_SHELL_LIKE_CSH=1>.

B<Note:> It is possible to invoke an alternative shell with command line
options. If the value of the environment variable C<RAWHIDE_USER_SHELL>
contains any ASCII whitespace characters, the command is split into the
absolute path to the alternative shell, and its whitespace-separated command
line options. No other parsing is done. The additional command line options
cannot be quoted, and so cannot themselves contain any whitespace characters
(nor can the path to the shell itself). No shell syntax is supported. It is
just a vector of whitespace-separated strings.

B<Warning:> Search criteria expressions that use the C<ush> "pattern"
modifier are not portable.

B<Warning:> This can be much slower than the C<sh> modifier, depending on
the choice of shell. Based on a trivial test on I<Linux>, here are some
timing comparisons against C</bin/sh>: I<ksh> is 1.64 times slower, I<bash>
is 1.67 times slower, I<csh> is 5.48 times slower, I<tcsh> is 5.53 times
slower, I<fish> is 7.10 times slower, and I<zsh> is 21.85 times slower. But
the language features of these or other shells might make it worthwhile
anyway.

B<Warning>: Here be mighty dragons. With the use of a wrapper script, this
even allows access to other languages that don't match the standard login
shell invocation convention. For example, the following wrapper script would
allow you to use I<perl> as the user shell:

    #!/bin/sh
    # usage (via rh .ush): perlsh -c -- $cmd $0 $1 $2
    exec /usr/bin/perl -E "$3" "$5" "$6"

But this is getting silly now. Although, it's only 2.73 times slower than
C</bin/sh>, so maybe it's not so silly. The I<python3> equivalent (no
wrapper script needed, just C<RAWHIDE_USER_SHELL_LIKE_CSH=1>) is 16.72 times
slower than C</bin/sh>. But don't read too much into these timings. They
aren't meaningful tests. They're only testing process startup times.

=back

=head2 Reference file fields

Reference file fields (C<">I</path>C<".>I<field>) are suffixes to string
literals that represent the inode metadata of arbitrary reference files for
the purpose of comparison. There must be no spaces around the dot between
the path string and the field name.

If the path is the empty string (e.g., C<"".>I<field>), then it refers to
the most recent reference file path encountered by the parser. This makes
multiple references to the same reference file more concise (e.g.,
S<C<< "/path".exists && mtime > "".mtime >>>).

The following reference file fields are available.

=over 4

=item C<exists>

This is true (i.e., non-zero) when the reference file exists (i.e., when
I<rh(1)> can obtain its I<stat(2)> structure information). Note that a false
value (i.e., zero) might be due to permissions, rather than non-existence.

If there is any chance that a reference file does not exist, then the
C<exists> field must be used to determine whether or not most of the other
reference file fields can be used. If a reference file does not exist, and
any of its I<stat(2)> structure fields below are used in a file test
expression, an error message will be output, and I<rh(1)> will terminate
with a non-zero exit status. C<exists> is to be used with the C<?:> or C<||>
or C<&&> operator (see above) to conditionally use any of the following
I<stat(2)> structure fields (e.g., S<C<< "/path".exists && size > "".size >>>).

=item C<dev>

The device number of the device/filesystem that the reference file resides
on. This is the C<st_dev> field of the corresponding I<stat(2)>
structure. See the related C<major> and C<minor> reference file fields (next) for
extracting the major and minor device numbers from C<dev>.

It is an error to use this if the reference file does not exist. See
C<exists> above.

=item C<major>

The major device number of the device/filesystem that the reference file
resides on. This is part of the C<st_dev> field of the corresponding
I<stat(2)> structure.

It is an error to use this if the reference file does not exist. See
C<exists> above.

=item C<minor>

The minor device number of the device/filesystem that the reference file
resides on. This is part of the C<st_dev> field of the corresponding
I<stat(2)> structure.

It is an error to use this if the reference file does not exist. See
C<exists> above.

=item C<ino>

The inode number of the reference file. This is the C<st_ino> field of the
corresponding I<stat(2)> structure.

It is an error to use this if the reference file does not exist. See
C<exists> above.

=item C<mode>

The mode of the reference file. This is the C<st_mode> field of the
corresponding I<stat(2)> structure. This contains the file type and
permissions. See the related C<type> and C<perm> reference file fields
(next) for extracting the file type and permissions from C<mode>.

It is an error to use this if the reference file does not exist. See
C<exists> above.

=item C<type>

The file type of the reference file (i.e., an alias for S<C<mode & IFMT>>).

It is an error to use this if the reference file does not exist. See
C<exists> above.

=item C<perm>

The file permissions of the reference file (i.e., an alias for S<C<mode &
~IFMT>>).

It is an error to use this if the reference file does not exist. See
C<exists> above.

=item C<nlink>

The number of hard links to the reference file. This is the C<st_nlink> field
of the corresponding I<stat(2)> structure.

It is an error to use this if the reference file does not exist. See
C<exists> above.

=item C<uid>

The user ID of the owner of the reference file. This is the C<st_uid> field
of the corresponding I<stat(2)> structure.

It is an error to use this if the reference file does not exist. See
C<exists> above.

=item C<gid>

The group ID of the group of the reference file. This is the C<st_gid> field
of the corresponding I<stat(2)> structure.

It is an error to use this if the reference file does not exist. See
C<exists> above.

=item C<rdev>

The device number of the reference file. This is the C<st_rdev> field of the
corresponding I<stat(2)> structure. This is only meaningful for character
devices and block devices. See the related C<rmajor> and C<rminor> reference
file fields (next) for extracting the major and minor device numbers from
C<rdev>.

It is an error to use this if the reference file does not exist. See
C<exists> above.

=item C<rmajor>

The major device number of the reference file. This is part of the
C<st_rdev> field of the corresponding I<stat(2)> structure. This is only
meaningful for character devices and block devices.

It is an error to use this if the reference file does not exist. See
C<exists> above.

=item C<rminor>

The minor device number of the reference file. This is part of the
C<st_rdev> field of the corresponding I<stat(2)> structure. This is only
meaningful for character devices and block devices.

It is an error to use this if the reference file does not exist. See
C<exists> above.

=item C<size>

The size in bytes of the reference file. This is the C<st_size> field of the
corresponding I<stat(2)> structure.

For reference files that are symlinks (that are not followed with the C<-y>
or C<-Y> option), this is the length in bytes of the target path.

For reference files that are readable directories, this is not the
C<st_size> field of the corresponding I<stat(2)> structure. Instead, this is
the number of entries it contains (excluding C<.> and C<..>).

For reference files that are unreadable directories (and everything else),
this is the usual (undocumented) C<st_size> field of the corresponding
I<stat(2)> structure.

It is an error to use this if the reference file does not exist. See
C<exists> above.

=item C<blksize>

The preferred block size for efficient I/O on the reference file's
filesystem. This is the C<st_blksize> field of the corresponding I<stat(2)>
structure. On some filesystems (e.g., I<zfs>), this is specific to each
file, rather than to the whole filesystem.

Note that this is unrelated to the C<blocks> reference file field (see
next).

It is an error to use this if the reference file does not exist. See
C<exists> above.

=item C<blocks>

The number of 512-byte blocks occupied by the reference file. This is the
C<st_blocks> field of the corresponding I<stat(2)> structure.

It is an error to use this if the reference file does not exist. See
C<exists> above.

=item C<atime>

The time that the reference file was last accessed. This is the C<st_atime>
field of the corresponding I<stat(2)> structure converted to nanoseconds,
and combined with the nanoseconds from C<st_atim.tv_nsec> (or equivalent).

It is an error to use this if the reference file does not exist. See
C<exists> above.

=item C<mtime>

The time that the reference file's contents were last modified. This is the
C<st_mtime> field of the corresponding I<stat(2)> structure converted to
nanoseconds, and combined with the nanoseconds from C<st_mtim.tv_nsec> (or
equivalent).

It is an error to use this if the reference file does not exist. See
C<exists> above.

=item C<ctime>

The time that the reference file's inode was last changed. This is the
C<st_ctime> field of the corresponding I<stat(2)> structure converted to
nanoseconds, and combined with the nanoseconds from C<st_ctim.tv_nsec> (or
equivalent).

It is an error to use this if the reference file does not exist. See
C<exists> above.

=item C<btime>

The time that the reference file was created. This is known as the file's
birth or created time. This is the C<st_birthtim> timestamp field of the
corresponding I<stat(2)> structure (or equivalent) converted to nanoseconds.

This is not supported on all operating systems (i.e., I<OpenBSD> and
I<NetBSD> lack support), or by all filesystems. When birth times are not
supported, this is zero, or in other words, the I<UNIX> Epoch.

It is an error to use this if the reference file does not exist. See
C<exists> above.

=item C<attr>

On I<Linux>, the reference file's I<ext2>-style file attribute bit mask. Not
all file systems support all file attributes. See I<chattr(1)> and
I<lsattr(1)> for details. See C</etc/rawhide.conf.d/attributes> for all the
related constants (e.g., C<ATTR_IMMUTABLE>, C<ATTR_APPEND>, ...).

It is an error to use this if the reference file does not exist. See
C<exists> above.

Note: If the reference file is a symlink, it is never followed for the
purpose of obtaining the file attributes. This is a decision made by
I<libe2p>. This is not affected by the C<-y> or C<-Y> options. Also note
that symlinks do not have their own file attributes (i.e., C<attr> is zero).

On I<Linux>, this is only available on systems with I<libe2p>. On I<Linux>
systems without I<libe2p>, this is not a built-in symbol. Instead, this is a
place-holder function that returns zero.

This is also available on I<FreeBSD>, I<OpenBSD>, I<NetBSD>, I<macOS>, and
I<Solaris>. The attributes/flags that are available vary from system to
system. See I<chflags(1)> (or I<chmod(1)> on I<Solaris>) for details. See
C</etc/rawhide.conf.d/attributes> for all the related predicate functions
(e.g., C<uimmutable>, C<uappend>, C<nodump>, C<opaque>, ...).

On other systems, this doesn't exist at all.

=item C<proj>

On I<Linux>, the reference file's I<ext2>-style file project number. Not all
file systems support all file attributes. See I<chattr(1)> and I<lsattr(1)>
for details.

It is an error to use this if the reference file does not exist. See
C<exists> above.

Note: If the reference file is a symlink, it is always followed for the
purpose of obtaining the file project. This is not affected by the C<-y> or
C<-Y> options.

Note: This is only available on I<Linux> systems with I<libe2p>. On other
systems, this doesn't exist at all.

=item C<gen>

On I<Linux>, the reference file's I<ext2>-style version/generation
number. Not all file systems support all file attributes. See I<chattr(1)> and
I<lsattr(1)> for details.

It is an error to use this if the reference file does not exist. See
C<exists> above.

Note: If the reference file is a symlink, it is always followed for the
purpose of obtaining the file version/generation. This is not affected by
the C<-y> or C<-Y> options.

Note: This is only available on I<Linux> systems with I<libe2p>. On other
systems, this doesn't exist at all.

=item C<strlen>

The length in bytes of the base name of the reference file. Note that this
is zero if the reference file is the root directory (C</>) which has no base
name.

=item C<inode>

An alias for C<ino>.

It is an error to use this if the reference file does not exist. See
C<exists> above.

=item C<nlinks>

An alias for C<nlink>.

It is an error to use this if the reference file does not exist. See
C<exists> above.

=item C<user>

An alias for C<uid>.

It is an error to use this if the reference file does not exist. See
C<exists> above.

=item C<group>

An alias for C<gid>.

It is an error to use this if the reference file does not exist. See
C<exists> above.

=item C<sz>

An alias for C<size>.

It is an error to use this if the reference file does not exist. See
C<exists> above.

=item C<accessed>

An alias for C<atime>.

It is an error to use this if the reference file does not exist. See
C<exists> above.

=item C<modified>

An alias for C<mtime>.

It is an error to use this if the reference file does not exist. See
C<exists> above.

=item C<changed>

An alias for C<ctime>.

It is an error to use this if the reference file does not exist. See
C<exists> above.

=item C<created>

An alias for C<btime>.

It is an error to use this if the reference file does not exist. See
C<exists> above.

=item C<birth>

An alias for C<btime>.

It is an error to use this if the reference file does not exist. See
C<exists> above.

=item C<attribute>

An alias for C<attr>.

It is an error to use this if the reference file does not exist. See
C<exists> above.

=item C<project>

An alias for C<proj>.

It is an error to use this if the reference file does not exist. See
C<exists> above.

=item C<generation>

An alias for C<gen>.

It is an error to use this if the reference file does not exist. See
C<exists> above.

=item C<len>

An alias for C<strlen>.

It is an error to use this if the reference file does not exist. See
C<exists> above.

=back

=head1 EXAMPLES

This is the default C</etc/rawhide.conf> standard library:

  # /etc/rawhide.conf: rh system-wide configuration.
  # See rh(1) and rawhide.conf(5) for more information.
  
  
  /*
  This file constitutes the rawhide standard library.
  
  On some systems, this file could be somewhere other than /etc
  (e.g., /usr/local/etc, /opt/local/etc, /usr/pkg/etc).
  
  You can modify this file, and/or place additional files
  in the /etc/rawhide.conf.d directory.
  They'll be read after this file, in lexicographic order.
  Any files whose names start with dot are skipped.
  
  You can also create your own user-specific rawhide
  functions in ~/.rhrc and ~/.rhrc.d/*. They'll be read
  by rh in the same manner after these system-wide files.
  */
  
  
  
  // File types (canonical, aliases)
  
  type { mode & IFMT }
  
  reg  { type == IFREG }
  dir  { type == IFDIR }
  blk  { type == IFBLK }
  chr  { type == IFCHR }
  lnk  { type == IFLNK }
  sock { type == IFSOCK }
  fifo { type == IFIFO }
  door { type == IFDOOR } # Solaris
  wht  { type == IFWHT } # macOS
  
  file      { reg }
  directory { dir }
  block     { blk }
  char      { chr }
  device    { blk || chr }
  symlink   { lnk }
  link      { lnk }
  socket    { sock }
  namedpipe { fifo }
  pipe      { fifo }
  whiteout  { wht || (chr && !rdev) } # macOS, Linux
  
  f { reg }
  d { dir }
  b { blk }
  c { chr }
  l { lnk }
  s { sock }
  p { fifo }
  D { door } # Solaris
  W { whiteout } # macOS, Linux
  
  
  // File permissions (canonical, aliases, helpers)
  
  perm { mode & ~IFMT }
  
  ur { perm & IRUSR }
  uw { perm & IWUSR }
  ux { perm & IXUSR }
  gr { perm & IRGRP }
  gw { perm & IWGRP }
  gx { perm & IXGRP }
  or { perm & IROTH }
  ow { perm & IWOTH }
  ox { perm & IXOTH }
  wr { perm & IROTH }
  ww { perm & IWOTH }
  wx { perm & IXOTH }
  
  user_readable    { ur }
  user_writable    { uw }
  user_executable  { ux }
  group_readable   { gr }
  group_writable   { gw }
  group_executable { gx }
  other_readable   { or }
  other_writable   { ow }
  other_executable { ox }
  world_readable   { wr }
  world_writable   { ww }
  world_executable { wx }
  
  
  suid { perm & ISUID }
  sgid { perm & ISGID }
  svtx { perm & ISVTX }
  
  setuid { suid }
  setgid { sgid }
  sticky { svtx }
  
  
  all(bitmask)  { (perm & bitmask) == bitmask }
  any(bitmask)  { perm & bitmask }
  none(bitmask) { !any(bitmask) }
  
  allr  { all(IRUSR | IRGRP | IROTH) }
  allw  { all(IWUSR | IWGRP | IWOTH) }
  allx  { all(IXUSR | IXGRP | IXOTH) }
  anyr  { any(IRUSR | IRGRP | IROTH) }
  anyw  { any(IWUSR | IWGRP | IWOTH) }
  anyx  { any(IXUSR | IXGRP | IXOTH) }
  noner { !anyr }
  nonew { !anyw }
  nonex { !anyx }
  
  all_readable    { allr }
  all_writable    { allw }
  all_executable  { allx }
  any_readable    { anyr }
  any_writable    { anyw }
  any_executable  { anyx }
  none_readable   { noner }
  none_writable   { nonew }
  none_executable { nonex }
  
  
  // Aliases for built-ins
  
  inode    { ino }
  nlinks   { nlink }
  user     { uid }
  group    { gid }
  space    { blocks * 512 }
  accessed { atime }
  modified { mtime } # Refers to the contents
  changed  { ctime } # Refers to the inode
  created  { btime }
  birth    { btime }
  len      { strlen } # Length of the base name
  sz       { size }
  
  seconds  { second } # Nanoseconds
  minutes  { minute }
  hours    { hour }
  days     { day }
  weeks    { week }
  months   { month }
  years    { year }
  quit     { exit }
  
  imayread  { readable }   # Uses access(2) not perm
  imaywrite { writable }   # Uses access(2) not perm
  imayexec  { executable } # Uses access(2) not perm
  
  ir { readable }
  iw { writable }
  ix { executable }
  
  
  // File types for symlink targets (canonical, aliases)
  
  ttype { tmode & IFMT }
  
  treg  { ttype == IFREG }
  tdir  { ttype == IFDIR }
  tblk  { ttype == IFBLK }
  tchr  { ttype == IFCHR }
  tsock { ttype == IFSOCK }
  tfifo { ttype == IFIFO }
  tdoor { ttype == IFDOOR } # Solaris
  twht  { ttype == IFWHT } # macOS
  
  tfile      { treg }
  tdirectory { tdir }
  tblock     { tblk }
  tchar      { tchr }
  tdevice    { tblk || tchr }
  tsocket    { tsock }
  tnamedpipe { tfifo }
  tpipe      { tfifo }
  twhiteout  { twht || (tchr && !trdev) } # macOS, Linux
  
  tf { treg }
  td { tdir }
  tb { tblk }
  tc { tchr }
  ts { tsock }
  tp { tfifo }
  tD { tdoor } # Solaris
  tW { twhiteout } # macOS, Linux
  
  target_type { ttype }
  
  target_reg  { treg }
  target_dir  { tdir }
  target_blk  { tblk }
  target_chr  { tchr }
  target_sock { tsock }
  target_fifo { tfifo }
  target_door { tdoor } # Solaris
  target_wht  { twht } # macOS
  
  target_file      { treg }
  target_directory { tdir }
  target_block     { tblk }
  target_char      { tchr }
  target_device    { tblk || tchr }
  target_socket    { tsock }
  target_namedpipe { tfifo }
  target_pipe      { tfifo }
  target_whiteout  { twhiteout } # macOS, Linux
  
  target_f { treg }
  target_d { tdir }
  target_b { tblk }
  target_c { tchr }
  target_s { tsock }
  target_p { tfifo }
  target_D { tdoor }
  target_W { twhiteout } # macOS, Linux
  
  
  // File permissions for symlink targets (canonical, aliases, helpers)
  
  tperm { tmode & ~IFMT }
  
  tur { tperm & IRUSR }
  tuw { tperm & IWUSR }
  tux { tperm & IXUSR }
  tgr { tperm & IRGRP }
  tgw { tperm & IWGRP }
  tgx { tperm & IXGRP }
  tor { tperm & IROTH }
  tow { tperm & IWOTH }
  tox { tperm & IXOTH }
  twr { tperm & IROTH }
  tww { tperm & IWOTH }
  twx { tperm & IXOTH }
  
  target_perm { tperm }
  
  target_ur { tur }
  target_uw { tuw }
  target_ux { tux }
  target_gr { tgr }
  target_gw { tgw }
  target_gx { tgx }
  target_or { tor }
  target_ow { tow }
  target_ox { tox }
  target_wr { twr }
  target_ww { tww }
  target_wx { twx }
  
  target_user_readable    { tur }
  target_user_writable    { tuw }
  target_user_executable  { tux }
  target_group_readable   { tgr }
  target_group_writable   { tgw }
  target_group_executable { tgx }
  target_other_readable   { tor }
  target_other_writable   { tow }
  target_other_executable { tox }
  target_world_readable   { twr }
  target_world_writable   { tww }
  target_world_executable { twx }
  
  
  tsuid { tperm & ISUID }
  tsgid { tperm & ISGID }
  tsvtx { tperm & ISVTX }
  
  tsetuid { tsuid }
  tsetgid { tsgid }
  tsticky { tsvtx }
  
  target_suid { tsuid }
  target_sgid { tsgid }
  target_svtx { tsvtx }
  
  target_setuid { tsuid }
  target_setgid { tsgid }
  target_sticky { tsvtx }
  
  
  tall(bitmask)  { (tperm & bitmask) == bitmask }
  tany(bitmask)  { tperm & bitmask }
  tnone(bitmask) { !tany(bitmask) }
  
  tallr  { tall(IRUSR | IRGRP | IROTH) }
  tallw  { tall(IWUSR | IWGRP | IWOTH) }
  tallx  { tall(IXUSR | IXGRP | IXOTH) }
  tanyr  { tany(IRUSR | IRGRP | IROTH) }
  tanyw  { tany(IWUSR | IWGRP | IWOTH) }
  tanyx  { tany(IXUSR | IXGRP | IXOTH) }
  tnoner { !tanyr }
  tnonew { !tanyw }
  tnonex { !tanyx }
  
  target_all(bitmask)  { tall(bitmask) }
  target_any(bitmask)  { tany(bitmask) }
  target_none(bitmask) { tnone(bitmask) }
  
  target_allr  { tallr }
  target_allw  { tallw }
  target_allx  { tallx }
  target_anyr  { tanyr }
  target_anyw  { tanyw }
  target_anyx  { tanyx }
  target_noner { tnoner }
  target_nonew { tnonew }
  target_nonex { tnonex }
  
  target_all_readable    { tallr }
  target_all_writable    { tallw }
  target_all_executable  { tallx }
  target_any_readable    { tanyr }
  target_any_writable    { tanyw }
  target_any_executable  { tanyx }
  target_none_readable   { tnoner }
  target_none_writable   { tnonew }
  target_none_executable { tnonex }
  
  
  // Aliases for symlink target built-ins
  
  target_exists  { texists }
  target_dev     { tdev }
  target_ino     { tino }
  target_mode    { tmode }
  target_nlink   { tnlink }
  target_uid     { tuid }
  target_gid     { tgid }
  target_rdev    { trdev }
  target_size    { tsize }
  target_blksize { tblksize }
  target_blocks  { tblocks }
  target_atime   { tatime }
  target_mtime   { tmtime }
  target_ctime   { tctime }
  target_btime   { tbtime }
  target_strlen  { tstrlen }
  
  tinode    { tino }
  tnlinks   { tnlink }
  tuser     { tuid }
  tgroup    { tgid }
  tspace    { tblocks * 512 }
  taccessed { tatime }
  tmodified { tmtime } # Refers to the target's contents
  tchanged  { tctime } # Refers to the target's inode
  tcreated  { tbtime }
  tbirth    { tbtime }
  tlen      { tstrlen } # Length of the target's base name
  tsz       { tsize }
  
  target_inode    { tinode }
  target_nlinks   { tnlinks }
  target_user     { tuser }
  target_group    { tgroup }
  target_space    { tspace }
  target_accessed { taccessed }
  target_modified { tmodified }
  target_changed  { tchanged }
  target_created  { tcreated }
  target_birth    { tbirth }
  target_len      { tlen }
  target_sz       { tsz }
  
  
  // Aliases for size units
  
  KiB { 1K }
  MiB { 1M }
  GiB { 1G }
  TiB { 1T }
  PiB { 1P }
  EiB { 1E }
  
  KB { 1k }
  MB { 1m }
  GB { 1g }
  TB { 1t }
  PB { 1p }
  EB { 1e }
  
  
  // Miscellaneous helper functions
  
  empty { size == 0 } # Only for files and readable directories
  roots { uid == 0 }
  mine { uid == $$ }
  ours { gid == @@ }
  broken { symlink && !texists }
  dangling { broken }

  gmtoday { now - now % day }
  future { mtime > now }
  
  ago(sec)  { now - sec }
  old(sec)  { mtime <= ago(sec) }
  past(sec) { mtime >= ago(sec) && !future }
  
  min(x, y) { (x < y) ? x : y }
  max(x, y) { (x > y) ? x : y }
  abs(x)    { (x < 0) ? -x : x }
  
  
  // Examples
  
  // Complex tests can be very readable (and/or very concise)
  // rootshell { setuid && roots && (group_writable | other_writable) }
  // rootshell { suid && roots && (gw | ow) }
  // csrc { "*.[ch]" || "[Mm]akefile" }
  // oldaout { "a.out" && f && old(week) }
  // oldcore { "^core(\.\d+)?$".re && f && old(week) }
  // bad { oldaout || oldcore || "*.BAK" || "*.CKP" || (gw | ow) }
  // Note: Read "<" and ">" as before/after, not as less/more than
  // recent { modified >= ago(hour) }
  
  // Silly recursive functions are possible (but not mutual recursion)
  // sqrt1(n, odd) { (n <= 0) ? 0 : sqrt1(n - odd, odd + 2) + 1 }
  // sqrt(n) { sqrt1(n, 1) }
  // prime1(n, i) { (i * i > n) ? 1 : !(n % i) ? 0 : prime1(n, i + 2) }
  // prime(n) { (n < 2) ? 0 : !(n % 2) ? n == 2 : prime1(n, 3) }
  // factorial(x) { (x > 0) ? x * factorial(x - 1) : 1 }
  // ack(x, y) { !x ? y+1 : !y ? ack(x-1, 1) : ack(x-1, ack(x, y-1)) }

The following aliases provide greater brevity for some built-ins. Perhaps
they could have gone into the standard library, but you might have better
uses for these identifiers.

  // Brevity (aliases)
  
  i { ino }
  n { nlink }
  u { uid }
  g { gid }
  a { atime }
  m { mtime }
  
  su { suid }
  sg { sgid }
  
  nu { nouser }
  ng { nogroup }
  
  r { readable }
  w { writable }
  x { executable }
  
  q { exit }
  
  sec { second }
  mn  { minute }
  hr  { hour }
  dy  { day }
  wk  { week }
  mth { month }
  yr  { year }

On I<Linux> systems with I<libe2p>, this is the
C</etc/rawhide.conf.d/attributes> library:

  # /etc/rawhide.conf.d/attributes (Linux)
  # See rh(1) and rawhide.conf(5) for more information.
  
  /*
  This file defines aliases for the built-in symbols for the
  Linux ext2-style file attributes, and the related constants
  and predicates. See <e2p/e2p.h> and <ext2fs/ext2_fs.h>.
  */
  
  // Aliases for the Linux ext2-style attribute built-ins
  
  flag       { attr }
  flags      { attr }
  attrs      { attr }
  attribute  { attr }
  attributes { attr }
  project    { proj }
  generation { gen }
  
  // Attribute constants from <ext2fs/ext2_fs.h>
  
  ATTR_SECRM            { 0x00000001 } # Secure deletion
  ATTR_UNRM             { 0x00000002 } # Undelete
  ATTR_COMPR            { 0x00000004 } # Compress file
  ATTR_SYNC             { 0x00000008 } # Synchronous updates
  ATTR_IMMUTABLE        { 0x00000010 } # Immutable file
  ATTR_APPEND           { 0x00000020 } # Writes to file may only append
  ATTR_NODUMP           { 0x00000040 } # Do not dump file
  ATTR_NOATIME          { 0x00000080 } # Do not update atime
  ATTR_DIRTY            { 0x00000100 }
  ATTR_COMPRBLK         { 0x00000200 } # One or more compressed clusters
  ATTR_NOCOMPR          { 0x00000400 } # Access raw compressed data
  ATTR_ENCRYPT          { 0x00000800 } # Encrypted
  ATTR_BTREE            { 0x00001000 } # Btree format directory
  ATTR_INDEX            { 0x00001000 } # Hash-indexed directory
  ATTR_IMAGIC           { 0x00002000 }
  ATTR_JOURNAL_DATA     { 0x00004000 } # File data should be journaled
  ATTR_NOTAIL           { 0x00008000 } # File tail should not be merged
  ATTR_DIRSYNC          { 0x00010000 } # Synchronous dir modifications
  ATTR_TOPDIR           { 0x00020000 } # Top of directory hierarchies
  ATTR_HUGE_FILE        { 0x00040000 } # Set to each huge file
  ATTR_EXTENTS          { 0x00080000 } # Inode uses extents
  ATTR_VERITY           { 0x00100000 } # Verity protected inode
  ATTR_EA_INODE         { 0x00200000 } # Inode used for large EA
  ATTR_NOCOW            { 0x00800000 } # Do not cow file
  ATTR_SNAPFILE         { 0x01000000 } # Inode is a snapshot
  ATTR_DAX              { 0x02000000 } # Inode is DAX
  ATTR_SNAPFILE_DELETED { 0x04000000 } # Snapshot is being deleted
  ATTR_SNAPFILE_SHRUNK  { 0x08000000 } # Snapshot shrink has completed
  ATTR_INLINE_DATA      { 0x10000000 } # Inode has inline data
  ATTR_PROJINHERIT      { 0x20000000 } # Create with parents projid
  ATTR_CASEFOLD         { 0x40000000 } # Casefolded file
  
  // Attribute predicates (canonical, aliases)
  
  secrm            { attr & ATTR_SECRM }
  unrm             { attr & ATTR_UNRM }
  compr            { attr & ATTR_COMPR }
  sync             { attr & ATTR_SYNC }
  immutable        { attr & ATTR_IMMUTABLE }
  append           { attr & ATTR_APPEND }
  nodump           { attr & ATTR_NODUMP }
  noatime          { attr & ATTR_NOATIME }
  dirty            { attr & ATTR_DIRTY }
  comprblk         { attr & ATTR_COMPRBLK }
  nocompr          { attr & ATTR_NOCOMPR }
  encrypt          { attr & ATTR_ENCRYPT }
  btree            { attr & ATTR_BTREE }
  index            { attr & ATTR_INDEX }
  imagic           { attr & ATTR_IMAGIC }
  journal_data     { attr & ATTR_JOURNAL_DATA }
  notail           { attr & ATTR_NOTAIL }
  dirsync          { attr & ATTR_DIRSYNC }
  topdir           { attr & ATTR_TOPDIR }
  huge_file        { attr & ATTR_HUGE_FILE }
  extents          { attr & ATTR_EXTENTS }
  verity           { attr & ATTR_VERITY }
  ea_inode         { attr & ATTR_EA_INODE }
  nocow            { attr & ATTR_NOCOW }
  snapfile         { attr & ATTR_SNAPFILE }
  dax              { attr & ATTR_DAX }
  snapfile_deleted { attr & ATTR_SNAPFILE_DELETED }
  snapfile_shrunk  { attr & ATTR_SNAPFILE_SHRUNK }
  inline_data      { attr & ATTR_INLINE_DATA }
  projinherit      { attr & ATTR_PROJINHERIT }
  casefold         { attr & ATTR_CASEFOLD }
  
  secure_deletion  { secrm }
  undelete         { unrm }
  compressed       { compr }
  synchronous      { sync }
  append_only      { append }
  nocompression    { nocompr }
  encrypted        { encrypt }
  indexed          { index }
  direct_access    { dax }
  inherit_project  { projinherit }
  
  attr_s { secrm }
  attr_u { unrm }
  attr_c { compr }
  attr_S { sync }
  attr_i { immutable }
  attr_a { append }
  attr_d { nodump }
  attr_A { noatime }
  attr_m { nocompr }
  attr_E { encrypt }
  attr_I { index }
  attr_j { journal_data }
  attr_t { notail }
  attr_D { dirsync }
  attr_T { topdir }
  attr_e { extents }
  attr_V { verity }
  attr_C { nocow }
  attr_x { dax }
  attr_N { inline_data }
  attr_P { projinherit }
  attr_F { casefold }

On I<FreeBSD> systems, this is the C</etc/rawhide.conf.d/attributes>
library. There is a similar file on I<OpenBSD>, I<NetBSD>, I<macOS>, and
I<Solaris> systems:

  # /etc/rawhide.conf.d/attributes (FreeBSD)
  # See rh(1) and rawhide.conf(5) for more information.

  /*
  This file defines aliases for the built-in symbols for FreeBSD file
  flags, and the related constants and predicates. See <sys/stat.h>.
  */

  // Aliases for the FreeBSD file flags built-ins

  flag       { attr }
  flags      { attr }
  attrs      { attr }
  attribute  { attr }
  attributes { attr }
  project    { 0 }
  generation { 0 }

  // Flag constants from <sys/stat.h>

  # Super-user and owner changeable flags

  UF_SETTABLE  { 0x0000ffff }  # mask of owner changeable flags
  UF_NODUMP    { 0x00000001 }  # do not dump file
  UF_IMMUTABLE { 0x00000002 }  # file may not be changed
  UF_APPEND    { 0x00000004 }  # writes to file may only append
  UF_OPAQUE    { 0x00000008 }  # directory is opaque wrt. union

  UF_NOUNLINK  { 0x00000010 }  # file may not be removed or renamed
  UF_SYSTEM    { 0x00000080 }  # Windows system file bit
  UF_SPARSE    { 0x00000100 }  # sparse file
  UF_OFFLINE   { 0x00000200 }  # file is offline
  UF_REPARSE   { 0x00000400 }  # Windows reparse point file bit
  UF_ARCHIVE   { 0x00000800 }  # file needs to be archived
  UF_READONLY  { 0x00001000 }  # Windows readonly file bit
  UF_HIDDEN    { 0x00008000 }  # file is hidden [same as macOS]

  # Super-user changeable flags

  SF_SETTABLE  { 0xffff0000 }  # mask of superuser changeable flags
  SF_ARCHIVED  { 0x00010000 }  # file is archived
  SF_IMMUTABLE { 0x00020000 }  # file may not be changed
  SF_APPEND    { 0x00040000 }  # writes to file may only append
  SF_NOUNLINK  { 0x00100000 }  # file may not be removed or renamed
  SF_SNAPSHOT  { 0x00200000 }  # snapshot inode

  // Flag predicates (canonical, aliases)

  arch       { attr & SF_ARCHIVED }
  archived   { attr & SF_ARCHIVED }
  nodump     { attr & UF_NODUMP }
  opaque     { attr & UF_OPAQUE }
  sappnd     { attr & SF_APPEND }
  sappend    { attr & SF_APPEND }
  schg       { attr & UF_IMMUTABLE }
  schange    { attr & UF_IMMUTABLE }
  simmutable { attr & UF_IMMUTABLE }
  snapshot   { attr & SF_SNAPSHOT }
  sunlnk     { attr & SF_NOUNLINK }
  sunlink    { attr & SF_NOUNLINK }
  uappnd     { attr & UF_APPEND }
  uappend    { attr & UF_APPEND }
  uarch      { attr & UF_ARCHIVE }
  uarchive   { attr & UF_ARCHIVE }
  uchg       { attr & SF_IMMUTABLE }
  uchange    { attr & SF_IMMUTABLE }
  uimmutable { attr & SF_IMMUTABLE }
  uhidden    { attr & UF_HIDDEN }
  hidden     { attr & UF_HIDDEN }
  uoffline   { attr & UF_OFFLINE }
  offline    { attr & UF_OFFLINE }
  urdonly    { attr & UF_READONLY }
  rdonly     { attr & UF_READONLY }
  readonly   { attr & UF_READONLY }
  usparse    { attr & UF_SPARSE }
  sparse     { attr & UF_SPARSE }
  usystem    { attr & UF_SYSTEM }
  system     { attr & UF_SYSTEM }
  ureparse   { attr & UF_REPARSE }
  reparse    { attr & UF_REPARSE }
  uunlnk     { attr & UF_NOUNLINK }
  uunlink    { attr & UF_NOUNLINK }

  append    { uappend    | sappend }
  immutable { uimmutable | simmutable }
  nounlink  { uunlink    | sunlink }
  unlink    { uunlink    | sunlink }

See I<rh(1)> for more examples.

=head1 FILES

The following source/configuration files are read by default:

  /etc/rawhide.conf     - main system-wide configuration
  /etc/rawhide.conf.d/* - additional system-wide configuration
  ~/.rhrc               - main user-specific configuration
  ~/.rhrc.d/*           - additional user-specific configuration

The location of the system-wide configuration might be somewhere else,
depending on the operating system preferences (e.g., C</usr/local/etc>,
C</opt/local/etc>, C</usr/pkg/etc>).

The output of S<C<rh --help>> states where the system-wide configuration
files are on the local system.

The location of the main system-wide configuration file
(C</etc/rawhide.conf>, or similar) can be overridden with the environment
variable C<RAWHIDE_CONFIG>. This is only available to non-C<root> users (as
it could be dangerous for C<root>). The directory containing any additional
system-wide configuration files is derived from it by appending C<".d">.

The location of the main user-specific configuration file (C<~/.rhrc>) can
be overridden with the environment variable C<RAWHIDE_RC>. This is only
available to non-C<root> users (as it could be dangerous for C<root>). The
directory containing any additional user-specific configuration files is
derived from it by appending C<".d">.

=head1 SEE ALSO

I<rh(1)>, I<stat(2)>, I<statx(2)>, I<getattrat(3C)>, I<mktime(3)>,
I<fnmatch(3)>, I<glob(7)>, I<perlre(1)>, I<pcre2pattern(3)>,
I<pcre2syntax(3)>, I<access(2)>, I<acl(2)> or I<acl(3)> or I<acl(5)>,
I<xattr(1)> or I<xattr(7)> or I<extattr(2)> or I<fsattr(7)>, I<chattr(1)>,
I<lsattr(1)>, I<chflags(1)>, I<file(1)>, I<jq(1)>, S<I<The C programming
language>>.

=head1 AUTHORS

1990 Ken Stauffer (University of Calgary)

2022-2023 raf <raf@raf.org>

=cut

